00:00
 Unit 3, and we were talking about the idea and the concept of circumstantial evidence. And we had been talking about

00:21
 Uh, the types of evidence that being direct evidence and circumstantial evidence. Direct is the witness having, or the evidence having a direct experience of what's at issue. Saw the person shoot, I saw the accused shoot the victim.

00:37
 I saw the person steal that lipstick from the store. You don't have to make any inferences. It's a direct experience of the thing that you're trying to prove by calling the evidence. It is assessed by the credibility and reliability of that witness.

00:54
 then circumstantial evidence is evidence that you need to make an inference draw a blank or sorry fill in a blank to get to what you're trying to prove so it's not a direct experience of the thing that you're trying to prove the strength of that evidence is from the credibility and reliability of the witness but also from how strong the inference is that it makes so how many

01:17
 Blanks do you have to fill in? How close is it to the thing that it's actually trying to prove or how far removed is it? Is the strength of the evidence and the strength of the evidence

01:28
 inference that can be drawn is how we would assess the strength of that type of evidence and we looked at Villa Roman which I've now sent out the citation for and so on and added it to the readings list for next term and we looked at John versus R that both talked about the standard for assessing when a case is substantially or wholly based on circumstantial evidence when we can find or when it's safe to convict in that situation

01:53
 And the general idea was that if you are assessing a wholly circumstantial case, or largely or almost all circumstantial case, as a jury or a judge, you should be convinced that the only reasonable inference is that the accused committed the offense. If there's any other reasonable inference, you have to find them not guilty. That's the standard we saw in Villa Roman, very similar language and same standard that we saw in John versus R. And

02:24
 That leaves us going on to the third case that we'll look at that also repeats the standard, which is the case of R versus Vader. So this is a bit of an interesting case factually and legally. It's an Alberta Court of Queens bench case, so it's not a big case as far as like legal principles that we're going to learn from it. But it's good to look at the facts of it because it will help you to start to think about your group project.

02:49
 Because in your group project, you're going to have to prove a similar type of case, which is a murder that is circumstantial, that no one saw what happened, and to try to piece together that evidence to get to potentially proving the case against the accused beyond a reasonable doubt. And in R versus Vader, that's what happened.

03:11
 Mr. Bader was charged with murder of two people, the McCanns. We'll get into this. I'll take you through the facts and take you through some of the things that the court talked about in regards to circumstantial evidence and what happened in this case. But I will say this case is rather well known as well because the trial judge in it actually made a mistake.

03:30
 In convicting him and used a section of the criminal code section 230 of the criminal code that had already been struck down by the Supreme Court of Canada. But it was still in the criminal code and somehow this judge and their clerk missed it. The law had been struck down and used a section that was invalid to convict the accused. So it caused all sorts of problems within that. But.

03:51
 outside of that the assessment of the standard for convicting on circumstantial evidence which is the same as john versus r and villa roman that we looked at is in here again so if you're looking for the standard legally to assess when a case has been proven beyond a reasonable doubt on circumstantial evidence you could quote either villa roman you could quote john versus r you could quote the same concept from here any one of them will do

04:14
 But again, largely we're looking at this one to see what a more complicated, wholly circumstantial case looks like from a factual perspective to give you a bit of this wheel starting to turn for your group projects, okay?

04:44
 all right so that is the citation for it there it's a 2016 case

05:06
 It's in your readings and we will head down here to the introduction as there is no head note in this case. So Mr. Bader was charged with the murder of Lyle and Marie McCann. Lyle and Marie McCann. They left their house in St. Albert on a road trip to, and this is in Alberta, St. Albert, Alberta.

05:30
 on a road trip to Cultus Lake in BC where they were going to go to holiday and they traveled in a large RV and they towed a Hyundai Tucson SUV. So they're driving a big SUV. They were towing a small SUV or starting up driving a big RV and towing a small SUV. And they were going to meet their daughter, Trudy, at the Abbotsford Airport on July 10th. And then they were going to all go on vacation together from there to Cultus Lake. But they never showed up at the airport.

05:58
 And that was their first kind of indication to their family that something had gone wrong. According to their family at the trial, their failure to appear at the Abbotsford Airport was very unusual. These were very reliable people with very predictable patterns who were coming to vacation with their family, always kept in touch, always would show up. And again, were reliable type people.

06:19
 And their daughter immediately reported to the RCMP that her parents were missing when they didn't show up there. And they were not seen again, dead or alive. So their bodies were never found. So again, they need to prove here

06:35
 That they're dead. One of the things the Crown has to prove in part of the circumstantial case, right? But in the weeks that followed, a bunch of evidence began to emerge. The first thing was that their RV was found on fire near Minnow Lake, southeast of Edson. That's in northern Alberta.

06:53
 And their SUV that they'd been towing was found in an abandoned farm along the highway a ways away. And on July 3rd, the same day that they had left their home, their cell phone had been used to communicate with people that they didn't know. So someone had their cell phone, it looked like, and was communicating with people they didn't know on the same day that they left their home and between when they went missing.

07:17
 Forensic investigators located blood on objects found inside their SUV, and it was their blood, both of the McCann's, and a hat worn by Mr. Lyle McCann was found in the SUV with a bullet hole through it and his blood in it. And as the judge notes here, this is all circumstantial evidence, and of course it is. Still no one has seen what has happened, although

07:39
 As they start to put this together, we see the picture starts to become clearer and clearer, and the inferences and the blanks that you need to fill in become smaller. But the RCMP investigation commenced on July 10th, rather, and soon focused on one individual. That was Travis Vader, who ended up being charged with their murders. He was investigated. He told the police he had nothing to do with them.

08:04
 ends up becoming relevant because he is seen in possession of some of their things or is proved to be in possession of some of their things. And again, the judge talks about this is a decision to, you know, they're trying to decide whether the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Vader is guilty of first degree murder.

08:27
 Judge then goes into the background of the case and says he heard or the judge heard background relating to the disappearance of the McCann's and he heard evidence from a number of the McCann's relatives and he sets out who they are there as well as a friend and a neighbor that testified as to their travel practices and their July 2010 travel plan. So these people all came in and said this is what they normally are like. This is how they travel. This is what they do. We know them really well. This is kind of

08:55
 what they do when they go away and they told us about their travel plans for this trip and this is what they said they were going to do and this starts to establish supporting evidence of what they were going to do and when we see that they didn't do those things again that's some circumstantial evidence of what may have happened they the judge says that there was a voir dire where they admitted the hearsay evidence of the relative's testimony because it's hearsay which we'll get into what that means later tonight

09:23
 But they also, Judge, accepted the evidence of some other witnesses, one in particular, Ms. Moffitt, who gave evidence of the general travel and holiday practices of the McCanns. So she traveled with them and said, I know what they're like. This is what they do when they travel.

09:39
 The reliability of all those witnesses' evidence, whether we could count on it, how much weight to be attached to it, was challenged by Mr. Bader's counsel. But the judge says that he concluded that the criticism of these witnesses had no merit, given the fact that they were very familiar with the subject matter that they were talking about. Mr. McCann's counsel, the defense, argued that the judge should consider alternative paths of travel, destinations, and so on,

10:04
 So Mr. Bader's counsel was like, oh, they probably just went a different way and they ended up somewhere else. And then maybe something strange happened to them and they just disappeared. The judge says, I reject these submissions as empty hypotheses that are countered by the fact that physical evidence of the McCann's was subsequently recovered along their reported proposed path of travel.

10:27
 The defense's criticism of the Crown is theorizing a theme that we'll continue with throughout this decision instead applies to the defense submitting alternatives without supporting evidence or elevated plausibility. So the defense, with a good faith basis, advanced all these kinds of defenses, asked questions in cross-examination, trying to see if they could posit that maybe these people had ended up in a different place and had just disappeared or had taken off and didn't want to be found and all these sorts of things.

10:50
 But the judge says, no, I reject those. I've heard the arguments. I've heard the cross-examination. And it doesn't match up when I look at the circumstantial evidence. Then the judge goes into some of the reasons why. And he goes, starting off in summary, some of the accepted evidence.

11:06
 from these witnesses and at the trial. He said the McCanns had frequently holidayed with their RV, so their big RV, towing their SUV. The RV was used to tow the SUV. The key and the fob for the SUV were stowed in the RV. So they would keep the key for the thing they were towing in the big recreational vehicle with them.

11:25
 Lyle McCann was an ex-trucker. He was an expert driver of the RV, so he was very good at driving. And they were habitually very careful about their vehicles and domestic practices. Their vehicles were always clean and appeared new. So when we see things that come out of this that are different than that, we start to wonder why. They used the RV as their living quarters on these trips, and Marie McCann, the woman, would cook many of their meals.

11:50
 They carried a cell phone with them when they traveled. The cell phone was stored in the console area of the RV. The cell phone was generally used only for emergency communication. It was otherwise left off. They didn't use it regularly.

12:02
 uh they were observed by the people who gave evidence the day before they were leaving doing free trip preparations and brett mccann gave his parents a gift that they were going to take to uh his grandson the mccann's indicated their plan was to leave on the morning of july 3rd their aim was to reach blue river bc as their first day objective and their next identified checkpoint was the january july 12th abbotsford meeting with their daughter and then ultimately they were going to

12:28
 arrive at Cultus Lake. So there's evidence called of what their plan was and where they were going to go. And they had made reservations at the Holiday Park Resort in Kelowna for July 5th and 8th and Cultus Lake for July 8th to 22nd.

12:42
 And they also heard evidence that their failure to appear in Abbotsford to meet their daughter to go on their vacation was out of character, particularly in light of the fact that they didn't communicate. There's nothing communicated from them saying, hey, we weren't going to be there. Something happened. We didn't show up. All the witnesses said that is highly unusual for these people. They wouldn't have just not shown up to their daughter for vacation and not called or emailed or sent a message in any way, shape or form because there was nothing ever heard of them again.

13:16
 But they were last observed by surveillance cameras at the St. Albert gas station on July 3rd when they left. And they had receipts that they had. There were receipts that showed that they purchased things there. And then on July 5th, their RV that they'd been traveling in was observed at the Minnow Lake. I think it was a campground.

13:37
 And they put where that is out on Highway 16, which would have been a logical travel corridor to reach Blue River. So they're saying they left their home to get to Blue River. This is the highway they would have traveled. And this is where we found their RV. And a guy named Rolf Wenas was the manager of that campground. And he'd seen their RV and the SUV behind it parked on site number eight of that campground at about 1230 on that date.

14:01
 He knocked on the door of the RV to collect the campground fees and went back later on that day. And both times there was nobody present. Nobody answered the door. But later that day, around seven o'clock at night, their RV was found on fire a short distance away on a closed off road. And the cause of the fire could not be determined.

14:27
 But there was forensic examination of the RV and so on, but there was no human remains found in that RV. But the SUV, the Hyundai Tucson that they'd been towing, was subsequently located a few days later on July 16th, just off of Highway 16, where they would have been traveling from where they were coming.

14:48
 And there was a farmhouse there that was unoccupied and it had been broken into, disturbed, vandalized, and they weren't sure. They couldn't prove when that happened, but it was sometime between the fall of 2009 and July of 2010 when their SUV was found there. And the SUV had been driven hard, had been rammed into headfirst into a stand of trees.

15:08
 The outside of it was dirty, which we know is unusual for them. And there was an empty boxer beer can or boxer beer carton located nearby in an area next to the vandalized mobile home on that property. And the grass in that location appeared to have been compressed and bent down by a large vehicle, maybe an RV. So they're stolen cars found smashed into a tree with a bunch of beer cans around and at a farmhouse that people had been into the house and disturbed and vandalized the house at some time.

15:36
 relatively close to when their SUV would have ended up there. But that SUV was examined by the RCMP in their garage, and it was found to contain a number of items, including a can of boxer beer and a cup holder in the console between the two front seats. So now we have a can of that beer from the box that was on the ground outside in their SUV.

15:55
 a propane tank and a shopping basket in the back, along with several loose potatoes and some food that would have been from the grocery store that they'd been on surveillance on the couple of days before that. There was also the hat that was found in there, a couple of hats that belonged to Mr. McCann, including one that he was on video surveillance wearing a couple of days earlier in that grocery store. And we recall one of those hats has blood and a bullet hole in it.

16:25
 So the judge is talking about a bunch of the evidence. Then at paragraph 23, the judge goes on to talk about the positions of the parties relating to the arguments on this circumstantial evidence. They say the Crown stresses it presents a simple narrative that is supported by the evidence, all circumstantial. The Crown argues the McCann's just can't be alive. They had no reason to disappear. There were no bodies in the burnt out RV and the RCMP investigation

16:54
 Excuse me, has uncovered evidence that suggests violence. They say any other alternative is just implausible. It's just wild speculation wouldn't meet the standard for circumstantial evidence to be finding a different conclusion, a different conclusion. They said there is much evidence that links Mr. Vader to the McCann's.

17:15
 Crown witnesses saw Mr. Vader operating the McCann SUV on July 3rd, 2010. So someone saw them driving, saw Mr. Vader driving their SUV and he told the police, I had nothing to do with them, I don't know who they are. But he ends up driving their SUV on the day that they left and the day they probably went missing. And Mr. Vader told this witness who testified at the trial to go purchase a phone and box their beer.

17:43
 And that boxer beer is found where that SUV that he was seen driving that was stolen is crashed. And the witness said that Mr. McCann or sorry, Mr. Bader, the accused was agitated and they had never seen Mr. Bader with that SUV before. And they said that earlier that day, they'd seen Mr. Bader driving a different vehicle, which was an F-350 truck, a Ford pickup truck, which had engine problems and needed oil.

18:09
 And on July 5th, some other people gave evidence and said that Mr. Vader was again driving this F-350, had groceries consistent with what the McCanns had purchased at the grocery store where they had seen them on video surveillance, and he had firearms. He seemed like he was thin and stressed and he was on the run, was what the perception these people had of him when they saw him. And again, this would have been a couple days after they're suggesting that he killed the McCanns and stole their vehicle.

18:36
 And then they had forensic evidence, this is a judge reviewing this all, linking Mr. Bader to the McCanns. His DNA and a fingerprint were found in association with the SUV and its contents. So they can put him in the SUV at some point by his fingerprints and his DNA.

18:53
 And blood from the McCann's was located on objects in that SUV. And the SUV's key was found with the F-350 that Mr. Bader had been driving. But now we start to connect that to the key from the truck that they're trying to connect him to that was stolen from the McCann's. The key from that SUV is found in the truck, the F-350 truck that he was driving subsequent to that.

19:15
 And the judge says, or the Crown says, there's no innocent explanation for Mr. Vader's interaction with these items. There's no way to just explain this away as something other than he was involved in killing them. Paragraph 30, they find, the Crown says, cell phone records, text message information, and witness evidence clearly established that Mr. Vader was using the McCann's phone on July 3rd at 2.14 p.m. and onwards. So he ended up with their phone that was in their RV.

19:43
 By all of the accounts of all the other witnesses, he started using their cell phone that they almost never used right after they went missing. And continued to try to contact several people and did contact several people that he knew. Paragraph 54.

20:15
 Skipping down. So that's the Crown giving an assessment of what they say the evidence is that says that Mr. Vader is guilty. At paragraph 54, under dealing with an assessment of the law, the judge says, circumstantial evidence may be used to establish the murder is planned and deliberate, but the finder of fact must be satisfied that the only rational inference that can be drawn from the circumstantial evidence is the guilt of the accused.

20:44
 the accused is guilty. So we see that same standard that we saw in John v. R. and Dilla Roman here in R v. Vader again. It can be used to prove the case against them. It can be used to prove first-degree murder, which was it was planned and deliberate, even if it's solely circumstantial evidence. But it has to be circumstantial evidence that the only reasonable inference that can be drawn was that the person is guilty and for first-degree murder that it was planned and deliberate murder. Paragraph 58 says,

21:12
 assessing the circumstantial evidence under this heading. The judge writes, the parties agree this case is one that relies solely on circumstantial evidence. When the Crown's case is based solely on that type of evidence, then the accused may only be found guilty, where again, what do we see? That the standard is the only reasonable explanation that may be drawn from the evidence is that the accused perpetrated the offense. That's the standard for a circumstantial case.

21:38
 Okay? Okay. All right. We got it. Perfect. We've had it in three different cases. Good stuff. Oh, then what do you see? The judge quotes it from Villa Roman, which we already looked at for the same principle, which said, if there are reasonable inferences other than guilt, the Crown's evidence does not meet the standard of proof beyond a reasonable doubt.

21:59
 They go on to say positive evidence is not required to establish a reasonable alternative theory. Instead, common sense and logic to evaluate the potential implications of evidence or a lack of evidence. A certain gap in the evidence may result in inferences other than guilt, but those inferences must be reasonable, given the evidence and the absence of evidence assessed logically and in light of human experience and common sense. So they don't have to call positive evidence to posit other theories.

22:25
 They just have to be able to point to what's in the evidence or gaps in the evidence and say, but this could have happened. But this could have happened. It could have went like this. It could have been someone else who did it. Maybe they just disappeared. Maybe they got caught up in a human trafficking ring in northern Alberta. This is actually one of the things that his defense counsel tried to say was a reasonable alternative.

22:44
 And the judge not surprisingly was like, no, that is not a reasonable alternative to what could have happened for these people of this age traveling in an SUV in Northern Alberta. But then the judge goes on to say, of course, the line between a plausible theory and speculation is not always easy to draw. So there has to be some sort of other reasonable explanation to have them found not guilty and not just wild speculation.

23:10
 But the basic question is whether the circumstantial evidence you'd logically in light of human experience is reasonably capable of supporting inference other than the accused is guilty. Of course, we know that reasonable doubt is not far fetched possibility or fanciful conjecture. It has to be based in reality.

23:30
 And then the judge goes on to talk at paragraph 64 about this idea of exclusive opportunity. So exclusive opportunity means if an offense was committed and you can prove that there was only one person that had the opportunity to do it that was there, well, then that can be proof that that's the person who committed the offense.

23:49
 And they say if circumstantial evidence establishes that the only rational inference is that only one person has the opportunity to commit an offense, then logically that person must have committed the offense, even with circumstantial evidence. If you can put circumstantial evidence that puts only one person there, possibly only one possible person, then that is what we call exclusive opportunity, which is kind of the opposite of alibi.

24:16
 And the kind of classic example is if 2 people are locked in a room. No, 1 else has access to it and 1 of them ends up dead, even though you don't have. An eyewitness who saw what happened is all circumstantial. If the person stabbed to death, there's only 1 person that could have done it. That's exclusive opportunity.

24:36
 They say in those cases, it may then be concluded that where it is shown that a crime has been committed and the incriminating evidence against the accused is primarily evidence of opportunity, the guilt of the accused is not the only...

24:48
 is not the only rational inference which can be drawn unless the accused had exclusive opportunity in a case however where evidence of opportunity is accompanied by other evidence that can make them look guilty something less than exclusive opportunity may suffice so they're saying if you can prove exclusive opportunity well then you're there but if you don't have that but you put a lot of other circumstantial evidence that can go to show that this is the person that done it did it it can still get to that point even without proving exclusive opportunity in a circumstantial case

25:22
 Moving on to paragraph 66.

25:26
 In conclusion, the finder of fact may convict on circumstantial evidence where the only rational conclusion is either A, that the only rational inference is that the accused committed the offense, or the only rational inference when looking at the circumstantial evidence as a whole is that the accused had the exclusive opportunity to commit the offense. So technically, if you can prove exclusive opportunity, that's another way that you can get there on circumstantial evidence. But really, I want you to focus on this one. That's the most by far much, much, much more common standard.

25:56
 for convicting on circumstantial evidence. It is a very rare thing to be able to prove exclusive opportunity. Generally, what you're looking for is that the only rational inference is the guilt of the accused from the circumstantial evidence.

26:11
 Then the judge talks about disreputable Vetruvec witness evidence, which we looked at before briefly in another case, because some of the people that were giving evidence against Mr. Vader were his other kind of criminal buddies. Mr. Vader was a meth addict. He was into the drugs. He was up to bad stuff. Some of the other people involved in criminal element with him gave evidence against him. The judge instructs themselves on the law, which again, you don't have to instruct yourself on Vetruvec every time, but whatever the law is, you have to instruct yourself on it when you don't have a jury, which is what the judge is doing here.

26:42
 So the judge instructs themselves on the Betrebeck warning about these disreputable witnesses. And then we go to look at paragraph, we'll go way down now to 643. This is a very long judgment.

27:09
 this is how much it takes to put together a circumstantial case like this this is just the judgment of it never mind the evidence all right so 643 analysis so he's doing the illegal the legal analysis of the first issue that needs to be decided are the mccann's dead

27:35
 The Crown and defense disagree as to whether the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the McCanns are dead. The Crown points at the entire factual scenario, as the evidence has led, and concludes that the only reasonable explanation for the disappearance of them is that they're dead. They were reliable persons with an established home, lifestyle, family, and friends. Their bank accounts were never again accessed. Almost six years have gone by. There's no other plausible explanation. The judge says, when I look at all the evidence, they have to be dead. There's no other reasonable explanation.

28:05
 which is the circumstantial standard. Although the defense says there are other possibilities, they say perhaps they were kidnapped or the victims of human trafficking and are now in a different country. The judge goes on to say at 645, there are a number of defects in the defense's argument in that regard. The human trafficking and kidnapping suggestions are what they call empty hypotheses.

28:27
 There's nothing to them. They're fanciful conjecture. They don't relate to the evidence or lack of evidence. And the judge says, I believe I may take judicial notice that senior citizens are hardly the plausible victims of a human trafficking ring that, curiously enough, would be operating in northern Alberta along Highway 16 just by pulling over old people in Arby's. Not that I'm being ageist, but they were retired.

28:49
 And the judge just says, these are not the kind of people that are victims of human trafficking. That's an empty hypothesis. They don't even have to consider it past that. This is not a reasonable alternative to what the evidence is. He goes on to say there's much in this case that points to

29:12
 Mr. Vader being the one that caused their death. That includes him being in possession of their property, his blood being found on various locations that related to them, the fact that the RB was burned, and the damage to the hat and the firearm residue, the bullet hole and the blood on that hat.

29:29
 Again, relating to whether they're dead and whether Mr. Bader had something to do with it. They said this coupled with disappearances. Oh, sorry, that was to do with them being dead. He said this evidence coupled with their disappearances that are highly inconsistent with the evidence that we've heard about their life and lifestyles. Put another way, sometimes the context of a disappearance leads to the implication that a person attempted to drop off the map. Other times the context suggests a mishap or foul play. This situation.

29:58
 is not one of those. The assembled facts lead to only one reasonable conclusion. They're dead. And he says, I find it entirely implausible that they survived whatever happened in July 2010, but then were able to and chose to conceal their survival. Looks an awful lot like you got shot in the head. Your stuff all got stolen. Somebody else ended up with it.

30:19
 It is not reasonable to conclude that they somehow survived that and then were just like, well, that was pretty close. We should just abandon our families and move to Peru, never access our money, never talk to our family again. That's not a reasonable alternative. What the only reasonable, rational inference that can be drawn is that they've died.

30:40
 Then he goes into issues relating to motive and Mr. Vader being involved with her property and all these sorts of things. And I'll leave the rest to your review for the reading. Look at the assigned readings for that again, because that's going to help you with your group project and also understanding how circumstantial evidence works and what it looks like as far as the types of evidence, circumstantial and direct.

31:26
 Okay, so again, this is the last time I'm going to say it, but the rule for a jury or a judge to convict based on wholly circumstantial evidence, the evidence must show beyond a reasonable doubt and be inconsistent with any other reasonable conclusion than the accused's guilt, which is what the type of evidence we saw in Vader tends to be. Okay, that's the types of evidence now. We're going to look at forms of evidence. So we look at types, circumstantial and direct, and now we're going to look at forms. And those things are different, and they kind of interplay

31:56
 And we'll see what that means in just a few moments as we get into it here. But the forms of evidence are real, testimonial, recordings, and admissions. So types, circumstantial and direct, forms, real, testimonial, recordings, and admissions. And I'm going to give just a quick overview of what they are, and then we'll go into each one of them in depth. And in fact, with real evidence, we're going to break that down into three subcategories as well.

32:26
 So real evidence is something that is tangible, which can be measured and analyzed. It's like the gun from a murder, a car, parts of a car that are left on the side of the road when the police go to seize a physical, tangible thing. That's real evidence. Something you can hold in your hand and analyze and weigh is real evidence, form of evidence.

32:53
 Testimonial evidence as a form of evidence is the words of the witness. Viva voce evidence attesting to testifying to their experiences. That's where most of our evidence comes from. Viva voce testimony from witnesses. Recordings can be audio and or video recordings of an event.

33:17
 that is made of either an event that's at issue in the proceeding or some relevant thing that needs to be connected, thing that needs to be proved within it.

33:51
 Sorry about that.

33:55
 And it is something that is becoming more and more commonplace in trials now with the commonplace or the ubiquitousness, I guess, of cell phones and high definition cameras being in everybody's pockets. We're getting more and more CCTV, more and more dash-mounted cameras, more and more cell phone cameras, and there are more and more recordings coming in as a form of evidence. And the last one being admissions.

34:25
 And admissions are when one of the parties gives up something having to be proved. So you would say, I, as the accused, admit or make an admission as to identification. So I am not requiring that the Crown prove

34:45
 that I am the person who committed this offense or that was involved in this interaction. This isn't about who was there. It's about self-defense or it's about consent or it's about some other issue. But you can make an admission as a party and say, we admit that these things are proved.

35:04
 You don't have to prove them. And that becomes a form of evidence, the admission itself, which is generally a written document. But again, each one of these we're going to look at. We're going to break down in some more detail. This is just kind of a general overview. But what I will say is, before we get too far into this, is don't get confused about this. Types of evidence, either direct or circumstantial, can be a form of evidence as well.

35:33
 So you can have circumstantial evidence that's a video recording. You can have circumstantial evidence that shows the accused leaving the scene of a crime carrying a weapon or a bag that's full of something that looks heavy that they're dragging.

35:52
 Or you can have testimonial evidence that's the subject of an admission, which a statement of a person, a previous statement of a person, like an accused person that becomes admitted and doesn't require evidence to prove it. So just because you've discovered whether the form of evidence is direct or circumstantial,

36:14
 Sorry, the type of evidence is direct or circumstantial. It can also be broken down into its form, which would be real testimonial recordings or admission.

36:27
 So like a recording may show the alleged criminal event, in which case it would be direct evidence and a recording. Or again, it may show the accused leaving the scene of the known criminal event with a weapon in their hand or something like that, which would be a recording that is circumstantial. All right. So we'll start with real evidence. We'll go over that in some detail. And again, we'll break that down into three subcategories.

37:00
 So real evidence is a thing that's capable of being located in space and time. It has physical dimensions. It can be weighed, measured, analyzed, moved around. A lot of times is what we see go in as the form of exhibits, things that are seized by police officers as part of their investigation.

37:21
 And it can be something that was found by them during their investigation, or sometimes it can be something that was created by them during the course of their investigation. So like a gun, a knife, a swab of DNA, a document, a computer, a body of a person who has died.

37:44
 a car that was involved in a motor vehicle accident that is at issue within this allegation, the jewels that are stolen from a vault, just the stuff that you can pick up and hold and measure and weigh and analyze, that is real evidence. It is tangible. It's in a physical state. And in a trial, it takes the form of exhibits. That's how we enter it in. And usually, generally speaking,

38:13
 General rule is a witness will come in, take an oath, and explain, attest to what those things are, authenticate them, tell the judge or jury where they came from, what they are, and they will be entered as exhibits. Real evidence.

38:28
 And they can be things that are discovered by investigators or things that were used in the commission of an offense, like a mask or a weapon. Or it can be things that came about as a result of the commission of the crime, like blood or DNA, or that were discovered while investigating it, or things that the investigators created.

38:47
 So flow charts, reports, photographs that they took, all of those sorts of things are real tangible pieces of evidence that they've created along the way that they can enter as exhibits and they take the form of what's called real evidence. Tangible, you can hold it, you can analyze it. Real evidence.

39:14
 But now real evidence can be broken down into three subcategories. Or it can come about, I guess, in three different ways, but it can be categorized three different ways. The first one is real evidence, and we'll just say it's that true real evidence, which is the thing itself.

39:33
 So if there's a gun used in the commission of an offense, a knife used in the commission of the offense, blood that's taken off of the floor of where the crime happened, or the dead body of the victim, that is all real evidence, the actual thing itself. So if we're putting in an actual gun as an exhibit at a trial, that would be true, real evidence being entered as an exhibit.

40:06
 But why we have the subcategories is because a lot of times we don't put these things in as actual exhibits at the trial like it's kind of maybe.

40:18
 a little bit harsh to say, but when there's a murder or a death, we don't take the body and keep it in a fridge and bring it into court and wheel it in and put it in as evidence at the trial, right? That's not how it works. We don't need to have that. We don't need to do that because we can offer what's called real demonstrative evidence, right?

40:47
 which is a representation of the actual thing. So a picture of the gun that was used that was seized by the police, a picture of the knife that they're saying that was used in the offense that the police seized. It can be a drawing of the crime scene as it was found by the police.

41:12
 pictures of the car that was involved in the motor vehicle act or sorry the the motor vehicle fatality autopsy photos of the person who was deceased all of these are what we call real demonstrative evidence they're a representation of the actual thing that is at issue we don't bring when somebody gets hit by a car and it's criminal negligence or drunk driving causing death we don't bring the whole wrecked car into court we bring photographs of it

41:41
 We bring photographs of the scene of the accident. We bring photographs of the car and all those sorts of things. And those become real demonstrative evidence. They are a depiction, a representation of the actual thing that is at issue that we're trying to prove in that case. And that's why it's being put forward. Again, often real evidence is entered in its demonstrative form, real demonstrative evidence, a depiction of the actual thing.

42:13
 But sometimes we put in what's called real illustrative evidence, which can be a representation of the type of thing that's at issue. So it can be a photo of the type of thing or a schematic of the type of thing. We know from the expert ballistics report that this type of gun was used, but we never found the actual gun. But here's a photo of the type of gun that we say was used.

42:44
 It can be a photographic demonstration of how a thing would have worked, a diagram of a representative type of gun, a PowerPoint showing how DNA is analyzed in the lab, a map or an aerial photo of the scene of where the criminal event happened, but at a different time, not the time that the offense happened.

43:11
 a sketch used in an autopsy to show the location of injuries. It's a representation of the type of thing. It's not a photograph or a depiction of the actual thing. It's a representation of the type of thing that we're trying to call evidence on that needs to be proved. We call that real illustrative. It's an illustration of the type of thing that we're trying to call evidence relating to. So again,

43:41
 real or real true evidence, real physical, real demonstrative, and real illustrative. The differences, real is the thing itself, real demonstrative is an image or depiction of the very thing that is at issue, a photo of the thing itself, and real illustrative is an image or depiction of any object having the same characteristics of what we're trying to deal with and put evidence in regarding to.

44:16
 All right. So those are the forms of real evidence. Again, broken down into three subcategories. Yep.

44:32
 So most forensic reports, if they contain a opinion, they would be an opinion report and then they would contain real illustrative evidence unless they have like a pathologist report would have photographs appended and attached of the actual autopsy. But then they would have also illustrations of what they did and the depictions that are of the type of procedures they might have performed. So it might have both.

45:00
 But then as well, it would be an expert opinion report. But it would have likely real illustrative and real demonstrative in it for that type of one. And then testimonial as a form of evidence. Pretty basic, but this is where most evidence in trials comes from.

45:28
 Viva voce, out of the mouth of a witness. Again, almost exclusively the way in which evidence gets before a decision maker. And there are, of course, exceptions to that, which we're going to look at in the coming weeks because there's exceptions to every rule and exceptions to the exceptions. But generally, we put evidence in by testimonial evidence because it allows for cross-examination, which is how we're able to test that evidence. But again...

45:57
 Several exceptions to that we're going to see tonight and in the weeks coming, where we can get evidence of a person's speaking in without them coming into court to testify and give viva voce live testimonial evidence. But again, it's a viva voce evidence from a witness on the stand, in person, it can come from eyewitnesses, police officers, witnesses to other events, experts, the accused if they choose to, and so on.

46:26
 um next one is recordings so next form of evidence recordings we are increasingly a society of recordings

46:40
 And if you think about cases, I don't know if you guys remember the Canucks riots in 2010 when they lost in Game 7 in Vancouver against the hated Boston Bruins. And everybody went bananas and started looting stores and setting cars on fire and doing all sorts of...

47:03
 banana stuff. That case was a huge, huge, huge case as far as recordings. We actually had some clients at my firm that we represented that were charged in those riots. And the disclosure was pretty detailed. They had cameras from all over the city, from all sorts of different businesses.

47:27
 exterior, interior, they had a website set up where people could send in their cell phone videos and they collected thousands of cell phone videos and they would send us disclosure of three hours of our clients going around Vancouver and all the things that they were seen doing from all these different angles, sometimes five or six different angles, all put together by recordings. And that was 15 years ago.

47:55
 The amount of recordings that are created today compared to then is it's exponentially increased again and a lot of it high definition. Everybody has these cameras in their pockets. Now we see the introduction of body cameras.

48:11
 The VPD, I believe it was in 2023, started a pilot project with body cameras for VPD officers. I know the RCMP is in the process right now, I believe, of implementing procedures and policies and experimenting with it as well, but it's all about to start really opening up.

48:29
 And there is more dash cams and CCTV and cameras in buildings and in malls and exteriors and everywhere. And this is going to be an area of law that is expanding. And the law relating to it is going to expand quite a bit as well in the coming years.

48:49
 and recordings again can be audio and or video recording of an event or events and they have this dual characteristic because it said that they are both real and testimonial they are a recording but they're real in the fact that you can take that

49:07
 recording and analyze it and put it on a thumb drive and hold it. So it does have a real aspect to it. But it's also testimonial in the fact that a lot of times people are talking. And it's kind of like a witness being in court that's not biased and doesn't forget what happened. So it is its own form of evidence. But it does, they say, have a characteristic of both real and testimonial evidence to it.

49:39
 How come with advances in technology CCTV footage relating to license plates is always so grainy?

49:59
 There's a million different reasons why that could be, but it could be that it's an exterior video camera. A lot of times, I think probably what you're referring to is there's an exterior video camera of a business that's meant to capture right out front for people who are breaking into the business. And the police will see, oh, this car drove by or we want to see something that happened in the street. They go collect that video from the CCTV of that business and they happen to catch something.

50:26
 the car driving by of someone who maybe shot a person three blocks away. But that camera is not positioned with a focal point or capacity to try and get the cars on the street. It's meant to get the sidewalk in front of the business. So that happens a lot.

50:43
 And Jeff says businesses are cheap and good security cameras are expensive. It's true. But as time goes on, this is the thing. Another 15 years from now, video cameras are going to be cheaper. They're going to have higher technology. It's going to be cheaper to store the data that's coming from it. So this is an area that is, again, continually expanding. But it's because it's continually expanding an area that we need to be particularly cautious about for some reasons that I will talk about tonight.

51:11
 But again, this can be things that relate to an event being examined that has been captured on a recording. So it can be like a security video of a robbery or an automobile collision. It can be an audio recording of the accused confession to the police. That's a recording. That's that form of evidence would be a recording.

51:36
 Or it can be recordings of a voice that are said to be that of the accused. And again, they all have this characteristic of having secured a slice of time, and they both have a real and testimonial aspect to them. And we're going to go over the case of Nikolovsky in more detail in the future in this course, but we'll just take a look at the main point coming from that right now.

52:06
 or the main legal principle coming out of it. This is R versus Nikolovsky, and we are at paragraph 28. And this is the leading case about using and entering recordings.

52:36
 in trial and the supreme court of canada in this case said once it is established that a videotape has not been altered or changed and that it depicts the scene of a crime then it becomes admissible and relevant evidence not only is the tape or photograph which has been included to include real evidence in the sense that it's been the term has been used in earlier cases but it is to a certain extent testimonial evidence as well so the supreme court of canada says it is real you can measure it and analyze it but it also is like a witness kind of coming into court

53:06
 And it can and should be used by the trier of fact in determining whether a crime has been committed and whether the accused before the court committed the crime. They say it may indeed be a silent, trustworthy, unemotional, unbiased, and accurate witness who has complete and instant recall of events. It may provide such strong and convincing evidence that of itself will demonstrate clearly either the innocence or guilt of the accused. So recordings don't forget.

53:36
 They don't get scared. They're not biased against anybody. They become very trustworthy evidence, generally speaking. But we see here that it says, once it's established that a videotape or photo has not been altered or changed and that it depicts the scene of the crime, it becomes admissible. But what are we seeing exploding right now with photo and video? AI, right?

54:06
 It was like a few years ago, everything was deep fakes and it took a lot of technology and you had to have all this stuff to be able to do it. Now you can buy phones that can do it on your phone, that can alter photo, that can alter video pretty drastically. And we're going to see a lot of case law in the coming years.

54:23
 Couple of years, I would imagine two next two years that are going to have to deal with because it's been just kind of assumed for a long time that if you put a photo or video in that it hasn't been altered unless somebody brings up the issue to say, oh, that's that's been altered. There's something wrong with it. Courts would just accept it.

54:40
 but we're getting to a point now where we're going to see that that's going to have to reverse because it's so easy to change your alt of photos or videos so we're going to see a lot of case law i think in the next couple years setting a new standard for how when we know a photo or video hasn't been altered by some sort of metadata or something connected to it and experts or something to allow it to come in as we continue to see this increase in use of this type of evidence yep

55:14
 Is there a different digital signature for AI generated video versus an actual video? Not my area of expertise. I don't know. What I do know from the cases that I've done is that there's metadata attached to every photograph. And generally speaking, that can tell if the data changed, if the.

55:32
 backend information has been changed. Jeff might know more about this than I do, but I suspect we're going to come to a place in the next year or two where in order to get photos and videos in, you're going to have to prove that the metadata or whatever digital signature is attached to it can say that it hasn't been altered from its original form before we can have it entered in. Because again, it's just becoming so easy to alter photo and video. CCTV and a

56:02
 They do. Yeah. So you guys are taking a class where they're dealing with that. Even the metadata says it's super easy to modify and adjust. And that was one of the issues in the last case that I dealt with while we were dealing with photographs and metadata. That was the issue was that it was so easy, apparently, to change these things. And the judge was dealing with, you know,

56:27
 the metadata related to photos. And this was five years ago, four years ago now. So it's an exciting and emerging and changing area of law, but there are going to be some real significant new cases in it in the next year or two for sure. But here's the thing. There are dangers associated with recordings.

56:53
 And I will let you know what they are. And it's important to know them because a lot of times as people who work in the system or as trials of fact, like judges or juries, people look at it and they're like, oh, we have a video of what happened. What else do we need to look at? Why do we have to consider anything else? There's like, we can see the person right there. We can see the accused, clearly the accused kicking the crap out of that person on the ground. Clearly they're guilty of assault. Why do we need to do anything else?

57:22
 But there's problems with video, and I'll get to the question there in just one second. I'm just going to finish this chunk of what I'm saying. Videos don't always show the context of what happened outside of the frame of the camera. They can only capture what's in the frame. So there might be someone holding a gun outside of the frame that you can't see.

57:45
 They can only capture what's in that frame. And there may be something that is completely relevant to understanding what's in the frame of the video or the photo that you can't see as a trier of fact.

58:01
 Also, they only show what's in the video, not before, not after, or the context of how that happened. And this is very common now. We get videos of things in disclosure and in evidence from cell phones. And what happens is this. Whoa, look at that. Oh, man. OK, launch. Yeah. Yeah. Whoa.

58:28
 In the time that it took to get the phone out and the camera app launched, they stopped watching it. And maybe at the time that they start video recording it, again, one person is kicking the crap out of a person on the ground. But before they decided that they were going to be able to put this online and get a bunch of people to watch it and started grabbing their phone out, maybe the person on the ground had pulled a knife out and had threatened to stab the other person.

58:57
 Or maybe that happened while they were trying to get out their phone and launch the camera app. You can miss the context of what happens surrounding an event when you capture it on video, particularly with cell phone videos. And oftentimes the context of how an event comes into being and what happens before it and what happens while you're trying to get your camera out can mean the difference between someone being guilty and not guilty. The other issue is

59:27
 audio. If a recording in many, I would say most CCTV systems don't record audio, like just general ones on businesses and things like that, or record audio in a way that is not going to be very helpful. And if there's no audio, again, you can miss the context of what's being happening. If it's outside of the frame and you can't hear it, there may be things going on you have no idea from the video. Or if there even is audio, there can be dispute over what's in the audio.

59:56
 I had a case that there was a recording that was admitted as evidence that showed what was alleged to be an offense. And there was 2 thirds of a day worth of arguments over whether the person in the video said, no, just one more, or no, just no more. And you couldn't hear. There was, again, hours of argument over this. And all the lawyers and the judge listened to it 150 times.

01:00:25
 And it was not clear 100% what that person said. And that meant the difference between guilty and not guilty. Audio can be not as helpful as the video might otherwise be. So again, dangers of recordings. It doesn't always show the context of what happened or doesn't show what's happening outside of the frame. It might not show how the event started and there might be issues with the audio.

01:00:53
 that could color what is being shown in the video. Okay, online.

01:01:05
 If AI gets to be too good, do I think they'll ever stop using photo and video evidence? I don't see that happening anytime soon. If AI gets to be too good, they will find a way to test whether something is AI generated. I mean, tech is not my area of expertise, but I know that this is a continually important and increasingly important area of the law for criminal law, again, because

01:01:34
 we have and we know these problems with eyewitness identification that we want to try and

01:01:41
 distance from for using to convict people and photos and videos are the way to do that but i can't predict whether that's where the technology is going to go there might be a gap where it becomes so easy to um fake video for ai and photos for ai and there isn't the technology to detect it properly where we might see a gap where it becomes very difficult or almost impossible to enter in to evidence with video recordings that aren't from a closed system

01:02:11
 Other than that, I don't see it happening, but I've been wrong lots of times in my life. This could be one of those times. I don't know. It's kind of just looking into a vast technological future. And my area of expertise is law? Certainly not tech. That was it for online? Okay. And the last...

01:02:37
 I don't know why I can't remember the difference between forms and types. The form of evidence that we will look at is admissions. And you should now see section 655 on your screen. You see that there? Yep. Okay. So admissions are something quite different.

01:03:00
 They come into being before or during the trial, and they're used to shorten the proceedings and to narrow the issues that the trier of fact has to decide. They're almost always in writing, and they should be, and they're permitted under Section 655 of the Criminal Code.

01:03:21
 It's almost always the defense that makes the admission, although the Crown can by just kind of reversing a couple things. But the making of an admission means the thing that is admitted doesn't need to be proved anymore. So an accused can admit any one of the essential elements. And again, the most common one is the identity of the accused.

01:03:49
 So, again, if in a criminal case, there's no issue, you're like, as the accused person, I tell my counsel, I was there. I'm the person that's at issue. But this is about consent. This is about self-defense. This is about I didn't steal that. I actually owned it. Any one of these defenses that hasn't it's not about who was there.

01:04:09
 We'll make an admission at the beginning of the trial on identification. We'll put this form in under Section 655 of the Criminal Code that says, I'm the accused, Ryan Johnson. I give up formal proof of the identification. Ryan Johnson was the person who was at West Cordova Street on January 30, 2020, 2025. There's an issue within this trial. That goes in as an admission, a form that becomes part of the record and the evidence in the trial. And now we don't have to call any evidence to prove that.

01:04:38
 Crown is no longer needing to call any evidence to prove that. And this narrows the issues, and it makes trials much more streamlined. Spending days calling evidence on something to prove how the victim in a case died, like if we know that the victim in the case died from being shot in the face with a shotgun,

01:04:59
 It might take two days of evidence being brought in to prove that, but if there's no dispute over it, why wouldn't we just have an admission? Admission under Section 655 of the Criminal Code, the accused, Ryan Johnson, admits for the purposes of this trial, the victim, Joe Bloggins, died from a shotgun blast to the face on this date.

01:05:20
 narrows the issues and again this is how we start to see what's relevant and admissible within the context of that proceeding those admissions narrow the issues and now we're not calling it's no longer relevant we don't have to call any evidence relating to how that person died or what type of gun it was or anything like that and what's the point of spending two days in a courtroom calling evidence about that if there's no dispute over it it narrows down the issues and streamlines the trial

01:05:48
 But admissions can be made of the actus reus, so the actual guilty act. So again, if the issue is consent or self-defense, there's no dispute that the person got punched in the face. You can make an admission. Yes, I was the one that was there. I punched him in the face. We don't need to call evidence on that.

01:06:09
 It can be the weapon used, date, jurisdiction, continuity of exhibits is a very common one as well. We'll talk about this later in the term, but the exhibits that are seized by the police, they have to keep those all cataloged properly to make sure that we have the right things in court. And it can take eons to prove continuity if there's a large trial with lots of exhibits. But if there's no issue and defense counsel has disclosure and believes that all the documents and the exhibits were dealt with properly, it just...

01:06:38
 write up an admission with Crown counsel and they deal with a week's worth of evidence by handing in a couple of forms to the judge and they no longer have to call evidence to prove that the exhibits were dealt with properly. And this happens generally under section 655 of the criminal code, which we have up here.

01:06:58
 which says where an accused is on trial for an indictable offense. And if we recall, the definition of indictable offense is any offense that could be proceeded with by indictment, which includes hybrids. Their counsel may admit any fact alleged against them for the purpose of dispensing with the proof thereof, which means an accused person in a hybrid or indictable trial can give up proof of anything.

01:07:25
 Whatever needs to be proved, if it's against them, they can just say, you don't need to prove that anymore. Here's my admission. We admit that that part's proved. And it can be any one of a number of things. Again, I've gone over some of the examples and some of the more common ones. You can do this as well for summary conviction offenses. You just don't do it under Section 655. You do it through the common law. So you can do it for any type of trial. And technically speaking...

01:07:52
 The Crown can't make an admission under this section, but I've worked it out with Crown counsel many times where I want an admission from them and there's a police officer's evidence that there is no dispute over a police officer. We both agree a police officer went and talked to this person on this date and that person wouldn't talk to them and that is somehow relevant to the defense case.

01:08:15
 We just posit it, we word it as though we're making the admission that the proof is given up by us, but it would really be the Crown that would be agreeing that we don't have to call that witness because it's just wasting time and there's no dispute over what that police officer had to say.

01:08:30
 or and that's for the defense that's usually what it is there's a crown witness that they're not calling that would be of some assistance to us but the crown doesn't dispute that their evidence is what is in the report so we would make type this up which would say under section 655 the crown admits that this police officer or sorry the accused admits that under this day this police officer talked to this witness and the witness refused to speak to them

01:08:52
 Otherwise, we would have to call that police officer, have them take the day off work, come, give an oath, say, yes, I talked to this person on that day and they wouldn't speak to me. And then there would be no cross-examination of that person because nobody is in dispute over the fact that this happened.

01:09:07
 That's what admissions are about. Things that are not in dispute that we can just give up proof of that goes in by a form to dispense with the proof. It can be done informally as well. You can just get up at trial. You know, on the second day of trial, when the Crown starts calling evidence regarding identity, you can stand up as counsel and just say the accused admits identification. You can do it informally without this form. That's not the preferred method. The preferred method is to do it under the criminal code this way.

01:09:41
 so that is the last form of evidence admissions section 655. all right and now we'll look at the concept of weight which we've mentioned a few times before and the concept of weight is kind of another way of saying the probative value of the evidence

01:10:11
 Weight and probative value are pretty much interchangeable. And what it means is the tendency of evidence to prove or disprove what it's meant to prove or disprove. How much stock or faith or value do we place in a particular piece of evidence, a particular witness's evidence?

01:10:36
 And to determine when we're looking at potential for prejudice versus probative value, which we've looked at before, is the final step for admissibility and is going to be really at issue when we look at this next concept, which is evidence of propensity, a person's propensity or character or tendency to do certain types of acts.

01:10:54
 Potential for prejudice versus probative value is a big assessment. And when we're talking about probative value, we're talking about weight. What is the value of that evidence? What does it add? How much stock or faith do we put in it?

01:11:07
 And when we're talking about weight, it can attach to a piece of evidence, like an exhibit or a piece of real evidence. And it also attaches to every witness. Testimonial evidence is going to be assessed by the trier of fact for its weight. So as an example, so again, so for all forms and types of evidence, a trier of fact is going to assess circumstantial direct evidence.

01:11:36
 real testimonial, recording, all going to assess how much weight to attach to it, other than an admission, because an admission is just, this is proven, we don't have to assess. Although we would assess how much importance the proof might be to the other parts of the case, but it is proven fully. But, okay, here we go. So for pieces of evidence,

01:11:59
 We know that a person robbed a bank. We'll say robbed a bank. And we know that the person who robbed a bank was wearing shoes. We call evidence at the trial that the accused owns shoes. Sure, it's relevant.

01:12:16
 It's logically connected. It's material. It's legally connected. The person who robbed the bank was wearing shoes. The accused owns shoes. But it's very low weight. It's such low weight, it's almost worth nothing when we look at how much value it adds to it.

01:12:34
 But now, let's say the person who robbed the bank was wearing a specific pair of Nike Air Force Ones that had a particular groove pattern on the bottom and were a particular color.

01:12:52
 They're seen in CCTV footage robbing the bank wearing these particular shoes, and they have impressions from the bottom of the shoes. And then the police sees, in a search warrant of the accused's home, the exact same white Air Force Ones, the exact make and model with the exact same tread pattern on the bottom. Now the evidence of those shoes, that shoe, has way more weight.

01:13:20
 It has way more probative value. It adds way more to the analysis. We would place way more on it as a trier of fact. See the difference? So when we're looking at pieces of individual evidence, we would assess how much weight it has, how much it actually tends to prove the thing that it's there to prove. Similarly,

01:13:44
 A knife is used in an offense, a stabbing or whatever. A witness sees the accused on the same day with a knife. That tends to prove that that person had a knife and that they committed that offense as circumstantial, but there's some weight to it there that helps in the analysis. But if the accused is arrested 15 minutes later,

01:14:10
 with the same type of knife with blood on it, the weight of that knife, the evidence of that knife becomes much higher. It has much greater weight. It is of much more value. It is going to be considered to be much more important in proving the issues in that case by the trier of fact. It has much more weight.

01:14:34
 So it can be for pieces of evidence like that, but it's also an assessment that gets done for every witness. The trier fact is going to assess the weight to attach to every witness's evidence who gives evidence at the trial or in a proceeding. And if a witness, and this is the thing,

01:14:56
 Trier fact can accept some, all or none of a witness's evidence. They don't have to accept it all. They don't have to accept any of it. And that's a matter of weight. How much do you believe them? How much of what they said do you believe? And how much faith or stock, how much weight or value do you attach to what they said? So if a witness comes into court,

01:15:17
 They're straightforward and direct. They're straightforward and cross-examination. And they're credible and reliable on the stand. And you don't have any concerns about them as a trier factor. Like, wow, everything matched up with everything else they said. You're going to attach a high weight to their evidence. And you go, that's valuable. I'm going to really take that into account when I'm trying to figure out if this is proven of what happened here.

01:15:40
 But on the other hand, if a witness comes into court and they're clearly invested and interested in the outcome, like they're maybe a relative of the victim complainant, like their mother, they're evasive in answers. They don't want to answer questions. They're trying to be tricky with the way that they answer to not really say what they're not answer the questions that they're being asked and they get caught out on a cross-examination.

01:16:06
 And you see evidence later on that contradicts what they said about some things that happened in either a photo or a video. You see that they're not being truthful or they don't recall. As a trier of fact, you're going to look at their evidence and you're going to go, I'm not going to really attach much to that. I don't feel like I can trust them. I don't feel like I'm going to attach much weight to what they've said. Probability value weight. It's this like assessment. How much can I attach to their testimony?

01:16:37
 to the circumstantial evidence, to the piece of evidence, to the use that it can be put into the trial. What's it there to prove and how much faith do I have in it? And again, if it's direct evidence that a witness is giving, then they're the focus of the attention. How much credibility, faith, weight do I have and do I attach to them? And when we look at a witness's evidence,

01:17:03
 uh there's an old kind of list of things that triers of fact and judges have used over the years to say um we look at these to see how much weight to assign to a witness when we hear a witness not a closed list not official but this is the general things that judges will instruct juries to look at and that they'll look at themselves and that's when they're looking at weight is the evidence of the witness biased

01:17:29
 Do they seem to be giving evidence in a way that purposely favors or prejudices one side or the other? Or are they just being open and honest and they're not really giving your evidence in a way that is favored or tailored towards one side or the other? If they're giving evidence that's clearly tailored towards the prosecution and gaining a conviction, you've got to be careful about how much weight you attach to them.

01:17:51
 Do they have a motive to lie? This is not essential by any means, but if it's established that they have a motive to lie, that can be something the trier of fact will detract from the assessment. And then there's internal consistency. Does the evidence line up with itself?

01:18:12
 When they're cross-examined on the police statement, the statement they gave to the police two years ago, is it the same as the statement they gave or the same as the evidence they gave in court? Or did they say something completely different to the police two years ago? Does the evidence line up with itself? Does it line up with what they said at the preliminary inquiry if there was a preliminary inquiry when they're cross-examined on that? Of course, their viva voce evidence, what they speak into court is going to be their evidence, but they will be cross-examined on other things that they've said. And if it all lines up, we would say it's internally consistent and we would attach weight to it, high weight.

01:18:43
 And then we would look at external consistency. Does it match up with other evidence that we as a trier of fact accept?

01:19:00
 Does it line up with videos that we've seen? Does it line up with photographs that we've seen? Does it line up with other witnesses' evidence that we accept and trust and have attached high weight to that is internally consistent? So internal consistency, does the evidence of the witness match up with itself? External consistency, does it match up with other sources of evidence that we as a trier of fact trust? Demeanor of the witness is another thing that triers of fact can assess.

01:19:28
 assessing the weight to give to a witness's evidence although over reliance on demeanor the supreme court of canada has said over and over is a mistake in law and you should be very careful about over reliance on demeanor because not everybody reacts to things the same way and some people don't present on the outside the way that they are actually coming across on the inside so it is one thing that could be considered but not over considered another thing is what was the witness's opportunity to observe

01:19:59
 The things that they're talking about, did they see them for three seconds? Did they see them from across the street? Did they see them on a video camera, on a screen that was six centimeters by six centimeters? Was it raining? Was it dark? Was it light? What's their opportunity to observe the thing that they're saying will depend on how much weight we attach to it.

01:20:21
 and does the evidence just accord with human experience and common sense there's some things just as humans we hear as far as the fact that we're like come on no like there's no way does it make sense if it doesn't make sense to you as a human being when you hear it you're going to be very hesitant to attach much weight or probative value to it

01:20:53
 So weight will be assessed for all witnesses. And exhibits often have that same type of analysis. But keep in mind, admissibility and weight are two different analyses. So we go, is this piece of evidence admissible? OK, yes, it is. Once it is, then we attach a weight to it and we decide how much value it has. But just because something doesn't have low weight doesn't necessarily make it inadmissible.

01:21:24
 unless its weight is so low that its potential for prejudice outweighs it. Relevant evidence generally will come in. It's like we do the assessment to see if it's admissible, then we attach weight to it. And it might be admissible evidence. Like I say, if you're a witness and you're just like, as a prior fact, I don't believe anything that person has to say, OK, it was admissible. But we've attached no weight to it. It doesn't really come into our analysis. We don't really trust that evidence.

01:21:51
 So there's an analysis for admissibility and then the weight that's attached to it. And there are two different analyses, generally speaking. And that's just about time for a break. And we'll take one here in a couple of minutes. I'll just introduce this next topic, which is the last one in Unit 3 before we move on to Unit 4.

01:22:18
 which is the idea of evidence of propensity or bad character of the accused which is something that we talked about briefly before but we're going to come back to in more detail tonight and the general rule is this evidence of the bad character of the accused is inadmissible by the crown in their case against the accused

01:22:50
 Evidence of what we call propensity or bad character, which is propensity, is they have a tendency, this person, this accused, to behave in an unlawful or wrongful way. It's not admissible by the Crown to prove that they behave that way at this time, in this instance, in this allegation. Generally speaking, past criminal behavior

01:23:15
 Evidence to show that they're a bad person, that they're a bad character, that they're the type of person that would commit an offense is inadmissible by the Crown to prove the case against the accused. And the general policy behind this is because that type of evidence has very low weight, very low probative value, but it has a super high potential for prejudice.

01:23:42
 Danger being once a trier of fact hears that this is a crappy person or they've done illegal things before, they will stop looking at the evidence and just go, oh, this person's a bad person. They must have committed this offense or, oh, this person's committed this type of offense before. They must have committed it this time.

01:24:04
 Moral, we call those moral prejudice and reasoning prejudice, which we'll look at in the case of Handy. But generally speaking, probative value very low, potential for prejudice very high. It's going to throw the jury off of what they should be actually looking at, which is the proof beyond a reasonable doubt in this case to see if this person committed it this time. And it's potential for prejudice very high and what it actually adds very low because what someone's done in the past isn't evidence of what they've done this time.

01:24:36
 But there are some exceptions. And then there's some exceptions to the exceptions and exceptions to the exceptions. Not my fault. Didn't make up the law. Just going to try and teach it to you. Tonight, we're going to look at what's called the R versus Handy exception from the case of R versus Handy, or what's called similar fact evidence. And in R versus Handy, what we see is an exceptional. This is a rare instance that this happens, but exceptionally.

01:25:05
 A court, by hearing an avoir dire first, can admit evidence of prior illegal or bad conduct of the accused

01:25:18
 to prove either the identification of the person who committed the offense as the accused or to prove that they intended to do what they are accused of doing or rather to kind of bolster the story or support the story of the person who's made the complaint. But this happens only where

01:25:40
 Those bad acts, those similar acts or that prior criminality is so close to what is at issue in the present trial.

01:25:54
 that the probative value outweighs its potential for prejudice. And one of the things Supreme Court of Canada talks about is like, if you're trying to prove that this is the person that committed the offense, there's an identification issue you wanna call similar fact evidence, it would be like the other instances of activity are so similar to what's happening here, it's almost like a signature of the accused.

01:26:17
 And what they say is, in that case, the potential for prejudice starts to go down in comparison to the probative value. When we see that it's so similar and so unique to this person,

01:26:29
 what it adds and the weight of it starts to come up and it starts to eclipse the dangers that can associate to that evidence. And the kind of example that I always give is this, it's a little bit gross, but let's say a person's on trial for robbing, breaking into apartment buildings or breaking into apartments, right? And

01:26:52
 They're alleged to have broken into an apartment building and stolen a TV and a computer and phones and cash. And three times before, two times before, they've broken into homes, apartment buildings, and stolen various electronics, jewelry, whatever. That is classic, inadmissible character and propensity evidence. They've committed these kind of offenses before, very similar even.

01:27:22
 Probative value, very low. Potential for prejudice, very high. A jury hears they've done this similar kind of thing three times before, they're going to be like, oh, this person's a piece of garbage. We're going to convict them. Or, oh, they've done this before. Of course, they did it this time and not pay attention to the evidence. But similar fact, evidence might be able to come in and be admissible under this circumstance. A person's charged with breaking into an apartment. They broke into a ground level apartment.

01:27:49
 by going over the railing of the ground level patio, going in through a sliding door. They stole the silverware from the kitchen. They stole underwear from the underwear drawer. And they took a poop on the living room floor before they left. Why would you do that? Who knows? There's people out there that do strange things. But let's just say that's the allegation. Right now, this person's charged with that.

01:28:19
 And this person has a criminal record for three previous break-ins where they have broken into a ground level apartment, gone over the balcony, gone in through a sliding door, stolen the silverware, stolen underwear from the underwear drawer and taken a poop in the front room before they left. Now, the similarity of those incidents is so unique.

01:28:45
 then it starts to look like a signature of that person in the way that they do something. And in that case, you could apply to have those past acts come into similar fact evidence under R versus Handy. And it might be that the trial judge says, oh, the probative value of that now is very, it's getting higher. The weight is getting heavier. And it might outweigh the potential for prejudice that this could bias against this person in this case.

01:29:11
 but it is an exceptional case where that happens. I've had it advanced against my clients twice in my career. One time,

01:29:21
 They filed the application. We were going to go into a voir dire. I filed my response and the Crown dropped the argument after I filed my response. The other time in the voir dire, the evidence was heard. We made arguments on it and after the voir dire, the judge would not allow it to come in. It is an exceptional thing when this happens. It doesn't happen with regularity. And again, the general rule is prior bad acts of the accused are inadmissible.

01:29:46
 Similar fact evidence under R versus Handy is one of the exceptions, and we will look at that case when we come back from the break at 8.20.

01:30:23
 All right. You start with.

01:31:31
 Thank you.

01:32:17
 Yeah.

01:32:48
 Thank you.

01:33:18
 Okay.

01:33:50
 Yeah.

01:34:30
 Thank you.

01:35:00
 more yeah

01:35:33
 Hello.

01:36:48
 you

01:38:11
 you

01:40:57
 So. So. So. So. So.

01:41:31
 Yeah, so it's not just. Looks like it is.

01:42:19
 All right. So there's just one other thing before we get into the concept of propensity evidence, the evidence of an accused person to act in a criminal way or a bad way. There's also this idea of what's called character evidence, which is a slightly different thing. Character evidence of the accused is evidence that says the accused is a bad person.

01:42:50
 Evidence that the Crown calls to say this person's not a good person, they do bad things generally, they're a bad type of guy, and that's kind of propensity evidence. And again, it's generally not admissible by the Crown against the accused.

01:43:10
 except the exception is which there is always one if the accused does what's called puts their character at issue

01:43:24
 So if the accused by the cross examination questions of their counsel or by them giving evidence themselves puts forward evidence or presents their defense in this way, I would never do that because I'm not the type of person that would do that. Look at how good of a person I am.

01:43:43
 then the Crown can call evidence to rebut that, to push back against that. If the accused is trying to make the case and call evidence that, hey, I'm not the type of person that would do that, I'm a great person, look at me, look at how good I am, and the Crown knows that they're actually a pretty bad person that had done all sorts of terrible things, it does open up the ability of the Crown to call evidence to push back or rebut on the evidence or the proposition that the defense is putting forward that is

01:44:13
 I'm a great guy. I'm a great person. I'm a great gal, a great whatever. And I wouldn't have committed this offense.

01:44:22
 A kind of classic example is in like a murder case. If the accused, through his counsel, is asking questions of the Crown witnesses and then gives evidence at the trial that says, I'm as gentle as a fly. I'd never hurt anybody. It's that person was so dangerous. They came after me. And I was so scared for myself because I wouldn't hurt anybody. And I'm kind of gentle. And that person was really dangerous. And I had to defend myself because they're trying to kill me.

01:44:50
 then the Crown could call evidence to push back on that and say, no, actually, we have evidence that you've been violent before, that you are a violent type of person. And or they could also call evidence that the victim, the deceased person, wasn't known to be violent, didn't have any propensity for that or didn't have any...

01:45:07
 you know, community reputation for being a violent person. So again, generally the accused character, whether they're a good or bad person is not at issue. Crown can't call evidence of it unless the accused tries to say, look at how great I am. I'm not, I would never do that. Then the crown can try and call evidence to push back on that, to show whether it's true or not.

01:45:42
 okay so we'll look at the case of r versus handy because it talks about this type of evidence character and propensity evidence and so on in quite a bit of detail and gives a good explanation of it certainly better than i give because the supreme court of canada justice is writing it

01:46:14
 That's the case that's in your readings. This is a 2002 Supreme Court of Canada case dealing with this issue. And what happened in R v. Handy is Mr. Handy was charged with sexual assault causing bodily harm.

01:46:27
 His defense to the case was that the sex that he had with the victim complainant was consensual. And what the victim complainant's position was, was that she had consented to vaginal sex with the accused, but not hurtful or anal sex, which had been forced on her, she said, by the accused. And at the trial, the Crown wanted to enter similar evidence against the accused. So they had a voir dire, and they wanted to call the accused Mr. Handy's ex-wife.

01:46:54
 to say that there was seven or eight instances during their marriage where Mr. Handy, when he was being intimate with his wife, insisted on harmful or painful sexual acts with him on her when she wasn't interested and kept forcing the issue, essentially trying to say he was the kind of guy that wouldn't accept no for an answer and would just engage in rough sex whether the person wanted it or not.

01:47:24
 And it alleged to seven prior incidents that the wife was going to talk about. And the judge at the trial admitted the evidence. And the Supreme Court of Canada came along and said, no. That evidence was wrongfully admitted. It wasn't similar enough to get over this hurdle, this balancing of potential for prejudice versus probative value. It had way more potential for prejudice than probative value. And as well,

01:47:54
 The trial judge neglected to deal with this issue of collusion. So in this case, Mr. Handy's ex-wife had actually met the victim complainant a few months before the events at issue took place. They met in a bar and they talked and the ex-wife told the complainant that her husband, Mr. Handy, had a criminal record.

01:48:16
 She told the victim complainant in this case that she'd been abused by her husband and that she told the victim complainant in this case that she'd received $16,500 from the Victim's Compensation Board of Ontario and that all you had to do to get the money was claim that you'd been abused. So the wife who was going to give the similar fact evidence and the victim complainant in this trial had met before this incident happened that said issue where he's charged.

01:48:47
 And the wife had told this victim complainant, hey, he's a bad guy. He's done stuff. He's been mean and hurtful to me sexually and abused me. And by the way, I got a bunch of money because I got money from the criminal compensation board. And all I had to do was say that I'd been abused and they gave me this money. That brings up with this issue called collusion. And the Supreme Court of Canada says when there's collusion between the person who's offering the similar fact evidence and the person who's giving the account at the trial,

01:49:16
 that can undo the foundation for the admission of the evidence. Because the whole point, the strength of the similar fact evidence and how it can be admissible is that it's so similar to the issue at play in the trial that it would defy common sense to say that it would be a coincidence that it's the same person or the same thing.

01:49:37
 But if the people have talked and colluded and been able to compare their stories, that foundation is gone because you can't. It's not so similar that it couldn't be a coincidence. It can be explained that it's so similar because the people have talked and they could have just made up this story to make it look similar.

01:49:56
 And in order for it to be admissible, it needs to be so similar that it can't be explained by coincidence. And that's what drives up the probative value. So in this case, they said, not only was it not similar enough, but as well, the judge failed to deal with the fact that these women, because they talked prior to these events, could have just made the incident seem similar by talking about it, which undoes the foundation for why it would be admissible. Raj? OK.

01:50:29
 so they say the similar fact evidence was wrongfully admitted wrongly admitted by the trial judge and they go on to explain why and we'll go into the full text of the decision to do that to look at why and they said the principal issues in this case are the test for the admissibility

01:50:55
 of discreditable similar fact evidence where the credibility of the complainant as distinguished from the identification of the accused is the issue and the impact of collusion on the admissibility of such evidence. So Crown can try and lead the similar fact evidence to

01:51:12
 Increase the credibility of the complainant. Make it more likely that what they're saying is true because it's happened before so similarly. Or the other alternative is, and this is a different case that deals with this, but it comes up a bit here, is it can also be used by the Crown to say the person who committed the offense here must be the accused because the accused has done something so similar in a pattern of behavior before. But at the end of the day, what we're looking at is past evidence.

01:51:37
 bad behavior that is so similar to the issue at play in this trial that the Crown can try and enter it as evidence in that trial.

01:51:50
 And again, what the allegation was, was that the victim complainant and Mr. Handy met at the bar. They were drinking there and that she had consented to certain acts, but then it became physically abusive and violent and acts that she was not consenting to. And again, Crown wanted to call Mr. Handy's ex-wife to talk about seven instances from their

01:52:18
 abusive marriage that was sometimes violent to support the fact that he was the kind of guy that when he got drunk, he would just do what he wanted sexually and he wouldn't take no for an answer. So that was what this woman was saying was happening. They're saying he did this to his wife, so therefore you can believe this woman now because he's the type of guy that would do this. So it is propensity evidence. But what they need to do now is say it is so similar that the probative value starts to outweigh the potential for prejudice because normally

01:52:47
 the potential for prejudice will be too high. And effectively, what they were trying to do was lead evidence that he had a brutal disposition for hurtful sexual acts, and they said that would be highly prejudicial to him having a fair trial because the acts that they were alleging were not similar enough that the probative value was higher than the potential for prejudice.

01:53:12
 And this was a unanimous decision of the Supreme Court of Canada saying that it was not similar enough and setting out some new facts and sorry, tests and standards for similar fact evidence.

01:53:31
 And this issue was about the consent, credibility on consent. Was the complainant believed beyond a reasonable doubt as to whether the acts were consensual or not? And they go through the seven instances that the wife wanted to give evidence of. I'm not going to read them out here. It's in your readings. You can take a look at them for context. And they talk about...

01:54:01
 Then, so there's the seven instances the wife wanted to give evidence of, and then there was this evidence of collusion. So in this case, again,

01:54:10
 There was evidence at the trial that the ex-wife had met the complainant a few months before the alleged sexual assault took place. She told the victim complainant about the accused criminal record for allegations of abuse and that she'd been given this money from the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board. And all she had to do to get the money, all a person had to do to get money was to say they were abused. And they go through the cross-examination.

01:54:37
 of her about giving that evidence. And again, what the problem is here with collusion is if we allow similar fact evidence in, it's because we say the other instances before and instances in this case are so similar, it has to be the same person. It has to be that this person would do this again. It can't be explained by coincidence. But if there's collusion, the foundation for that

01:55:05
 goes out the window because we know that they could be similar because the people talked about it and could have made up a similar story. So that foundation of not being able to be explained by coincidence, the similarities is gone because of that collusion. That's what the Supreme Court of Canada effectively says.

01:55:23
 and why we need to be extremely careful when there's any evidence of collusion between parties that are giving evidence at a trial and then of instances of prior disreputable conduct that are being considered for similar fact evidence. So they talk about the general exclusionary rule relating to propensity evidence. They say,

01:55:45
 it's clearly correct that evidence of misconduct beyond what is alleged in this case does know that does no more than blacken the character of the accused it's inadmissible no one's charged with having a general disposition or propensity for theft or violence or whatever the exclusion for similar fact evidence generally prohibits character evidence

01:56:06
 to be used as circumstantial proof of conduct. That is, to allow an inference from the similar facts that the accused has the propensity or disposition to do the type of acts charged and is therefore guilty of the offense. The danger is that the jury might be confused by all the multiplicity, the amount of incidents, and put more weight than is logically justified on the ex-wife testimony. That's what they call reasoning prejudice, putting too much

01:56:34
 weighed on it than it deserves, or by convicting a person on bad personhood, which they call moral prejudice. That person's a bad person. Therefore, they would have done it. They would have committed this type of offense.

01:56:44
 They say at paragraph 35, these dangers of propensity reasoning are well recognized. Not only can people change their ways, but they're not robotic. They're not robotic. To infer guilt from a knowledge of character of the accused is a forbidden type of reasoning. And paragraph 36, they say the exclusion of evidence of general propensity or disposition has been repeatedly affirmed in this court and is not controversial. They say this is a general rule, generally inadmissible for these reasons.

01:57:17
 And now they say, what's the reason for this exclusionary rule? What's the policy behind it for similar fact evidence propensity? They say in some cases, propensity inferred from similar facts may be relevant. While in some cases it may be relevant, it may also capture the attention of the trier of fact to an unwarranted degree. So it may throw them off of what they're supposed to be doing. It's potential for prejudice.

01:57:42
 distraction and time consumption is very great and these disadvantages will almost always outweigh its probative value so potential for prejudice distraction of the jury taking up more time than it's worth will almost always outweigh its probative value so generally speaking almost always this type of evidence its probative value will be out or sorry its potential for prejudice will be heavily outweighed by its probative value because of those issues

01:58:09
 And they say it's excluded notwithstanding the general rule that relevant evidence would be admissible. They say if propensity evidence were routinely admitted, it might encourage the police simply to round up the usual suspects. And our whole system is based on people being rehabilitated and going through being punished and being able to turn their lives around. And if we didn't believe that people could do that, then the police would just line up the usual suspects every time an offense was committed and we would just put them in jail or put this type of evidence against them.

01:58:42
 At paragraph 39, they say the principle reason again for this rule relating to propensity is that there is a natural human tendency to judge a person's actions on the basis of character. Particularly with juries, there would be a strong inclination to conclude that a thief is stolen, a violent man is assaulted, and a pedophile is engaged in pedophilic acts. Yet the policy of the law is wholly against this process of reasoning. We have to look at the evidence in the particular case.

01:59:10
 And the policy behind this recognizes the difficulty of containing the effects of such information. So sometimes we allow information to come in and we let the judge just give the jury a warning about the fact, hey, you've heard this, but you can't use it for that purpose. But they say you can't really contain this type of evidence with a warning. They say once a jury hears it, it's like poison in their ears that courses through their whole body.

01:59:37
 except when it meets the test in this case. But they say there is a narrow exception of admissibility. It is exceptionally admissible. I want you to be clear, this does not happen often. But it is a recognized exception to this rule.

01:59:58
 But it may arise in the trial of the offense charged to which evidence of previous misconduct may be so highly relevant and cogent that its probative value in the search for truth outweighs any potential for misuse. So it can become exceptionally admissible when its probative value gets so high that it outweighs the potential for prejudice.

02:00:17
 They say the fact that the alleged similar facts had common characteristics with the acts charged, and as quoting another case here, could render them admissible and therefore supportive of the evidence of the complainant. In order to be admissible, however, it would be necessary to conclude that the similarities were such that absent collaboration or conclusion, collusion, it would be an affront to common sense to suggest that the similarities were due to coincidence.

02:00:40
 That's where we see it. They're so similar that you can't explain it by coincidence. It has to be that it's the same person or that we can believe the person about the victim complaining about what happened. They talk about this old case of Mackin where there was

02:01:01
 a bunch of dead children found in someone's backyard and in previous houses where they lived. And they said, the death of one small child found buried in the backyard of the accused could conceivably be thought to be from natural or perhaps accidental causes. But when numerous other bodies were later dug up in the same backyard and at previous residences of the accused, the coincidence of so many premature deaths by innocent causes of babies of recent good health defied belief. Coincidence, as an explanation, has its limitations.

02:01:31
 The man who wins the lottery once is envied. The man who wins it twice is investigated. That's this idea when they're so similar that they can't be explained by coincidence. It must be the same person or it must be that the victim complainant is telling the truth. Then we see this table tilt the other way and the probative value comes up and is higher. Now they talk about what's the reason for allowing it to come in exceptionally under the similar fact evidence rule.

02:02:01
 They say the policy for the exception is that the deficit of value weighed against prejudice on which the original exclusionary rule is predicated is reversed. So normally probative value too low, potential for prejudice too high. When that starts to reverse and the probative value outweighs the potential for prejudice, that's when we allow it to come in.

02:02:27
 They say probative value exceeds prejudice because the force of similar circumstances defies coincidence or other innocent explanation. That's the rationale. They're so similar, it defies coincidence or other innocent explanation. It's just too similar that it can't be explained by coincidence. But that is, again, why collusion is such a problem. Because collusion can then explain the similarities if those people have talked ahead of time.

02:02:56
 And they say Canadian law recognizes in paragraph 48 that the similar facts become more focused and specific to circumstances similar to the charge. As they do, the value of propensity thus circumscribed becomes more cogent. It's just another way of saying the more closely connected and similar the acts are, the more the probative value goes up. And what is the test for admissibility?

02:03:26
 Under subsection D, they talk about this idea where the probative value essentially in the assessment of it has to outweigh potential for prejudice and the similarities cannot be explained by coincidence any longer. And they go on to say at paragraph 51,

02:03:56
 The Supreme Court of Canada has previously affirmed that evidence classified as disposition or propensity is exceptionally admissible. It doesn't happen often. It is exceptional when it goes in. Paragraph 51, at paragraph 52, they quote another case that says it can be admissible, but it is exceptionally admitted.

02:04:20
 I could show you three or four more times where they use this word exceptional, but I'll just leave it at that. It is a big exception to this rule. When it is admitted, it doesn't happen often. And the Supreme Court of Canada recognizes that. And they end this saying, it is presumptively inadmissible.

02:04:39
 And the onus is on the prosecution to satisfy the trial judge on a balanced probabilities that in the particular case, the probative value of the evidence in relation outweighs its potential for prejudice and therefore allows it to be an exception to this rule and to come in. But that is an exceptionally unique circumstance where that happens. The general rule almost always prevails. And every time I've dealt with it, that's what I've seen as well. It has been tried to be advanced, but unsuccessfully in the cases that I've dealt with.

02:05:18
 paragraph 76 they talk about the degree identification of the required degree of similarity and this is they're talking from a they're quoting from another case now that dealt with is this good enough to identify the person who's committed the offense for identification evidence

02:05:43
 You say the evidence of propensity on the issue of identification is not admissible unless the propensity is so highly or distinctive or unique as to constitute a signature.

02:05:54
 That's the kind of level of similarity that we're looking at. That's what I was saying, like the thing about with the break-ins where the person steals two very unique things and then poofs on the floor, that's kind of like a signature in the way that you commit an offense. Seems strange, but that's the kind of thing that they're looking for. There's no way that coincidentally two people are committing that exact same type of offense. That defies logic, right? That's the kind of similarity that they're looking at.

02:06:29
 And then we will finish off with the potential for collusion at paragraph 104. And the Supreme Court of Canada writing here says, they mentioned this issue of potential for collusion at the outset because if collusion is present, it destroys the foundation on which admissibility is sought.

02:06:58
 Namely, that the events described by the ex-wife and the complainant testifying independently of one another are too similar to be credibly explained by coincidence. So this is why the Supreme Court of Canada saying right here what the reason is for collusion making similar fact evidence that would otherwise be admissible become inadmissible.

02:07:18
 because it destroys the foundation that the admissibility is sought under, which is that the evidence of the two, the victim complainant in this case and the prior instances would be too similar to be explained by coincidence. If they were testifying independently, we couldn't explain it by coincidence, but if there's collusion, if they've talked, it could be that they, similarity is because they've talked about it and either at worst case, purposely made this up to be similar,

02:07:45
 or in the most forgiving case, talking about it influenced each other so that they ended up sounding or believing that similar things had happened. And at paragraph 106, they say, in my view, the trial judge cannot assess the objective and probability of coincidence without addressing the issue of whether the apparent coincidence is in fact the product of collusion.

02:08:12
 So they've got to look at it, hear what the evidence is, be satisfied on the balanced probabilities that it is so similar that the probative value outweighs the potential for prejudice, and that it hasn't been the product of coincidence, or sorry, collusion, because that would remove the foundation, which is the similarity cannot be explained by coincidence. In that case, it could be explained by the fact that the people had talked about what happened. That is the case of R versus Handy.

02:08:40
 And the issue of propensity, character evidence, which is generally inadmissible against the accused, except under similar fact evidence under Handy. Or if the accused in their case is like, look at how great I am. I'm so good. Then the Crown can potentially call evidence to say, actually, no, all these people will tell you this person's not a good person at all or not the type of person that they're trying to make themselves out to be.

02:09:09
 And that is unit three. We move on to unit four. So just to give a bit of a review overview from some things we talked about last week.

02:09:32
 So generally speaking, general rule, evidence comes from witnesses in court speaking viva voce testimonially under oath or affirmation. There's three types of witnesses. You guys remember what those are? Civilians or lay witnesses, police professional witnesses, and expert witnesses. And remember, a police officer can be qualified as an expert too if they go through the qualification steps that we saw in R versus Bingley.

02:10:02
 And civilians are just kind of usually accidental witnesses who passively experience events. Police or professional witnesses actively have a duty to record information and investigate. And they get paid and they have training and experience to be witnesses. And experts can offer special types of opinions based on their skill, training, and experience. And we talked about competence and compelability.

02:10:31
 And we saw as a general rule, and I'll mention this again today, I don't know if I got into this very clearly last week, neither judges or members of the jury or lawyers can be witnesses in a proceeding in which they have those rules. So evidence can come in from lawyers at, remember, bail hearings and sentencing in particular where there hasn't been a trial.

02:10:52
 But they're not witnesses. They don't get up on the stand and give an oath and go through direct and cross-examination. They just read in reports and that forms the evidentiary basis for those hearings.

02:11:03
 Generally, they cannot be a witness at a proceeding. A lawyer is not called at a proceeding that they're counsel in to be a witness to give evidence and to be cross-examined. If a situation comes up where that happens, and sometimes that can happen, an evidentiary issue comes up where a lawyer ends up being a witness because they've heard a witness talk about something that is at issue in the trial and now the witness denies it,

02:11:27
 That lawyer, and this almost happened to me once, has to withdraw his counsel. Another lawyer has to come in and take their spot in that trial. And then they can give evidence and be cross-examined and taken through direct about what they saw or heard that's at issue within that trial.

02:11:46
 And jurors will never be a witness in the case that they're hearing, although if there's an allegation of jury tampering or other misconduct by a juror, they might be a witness in a subsequent proceeding charging that person with that. And judges are...

02:12:02
 almost never witnesses. The only place that they would end up being a witness is if they're the victim of threats in the courtroom from a person or contempt of court proceedings or those sorts of things. Really, really rare that they would ever end up being a witness in a proceeding.

02:12:24
 But yeah, so there is a difference between a lawyer being a witness and a lawyer being able to put the evidence in at a bail hearing or a sentencing when there hasn't been a trial. They're not a witness, but they are putting the evidence in themselves.

02:12:45
 Yes. And the issue where counsel, again, would have to withdraw, just for general reference sake, the idea would be this. And this is what happened to me in my case. I spoke to a Crown witness. And that person said that they wanted to speak to me, wanted to tell me about what had happened. And they gave me a version of events that was different from what they had told the police. And I was like, whoa, this is totally different than what I understood from the disclosure.

02:13:14
 I'm really interested to see what's going to happen at this trial. And at the trial, if that witness had come in and said what they had told the police and not what they had told me, I could cross-examine them and say, hey, we talked about these things and didn't you tell me this? And if they denied it, I would have no way to prove what that person had told me unless I withdrew his counsel, was no longer the lawyer, another lawyer got hired, and then I could potentially come in and give evidence and say,

02:13:44
 take an oath, get called for the defense, and say, I spoke to this person on this date, this is what they told me, and then be cross-examined on it so that the judge or the jury could assess whether that person was telling the truth or not in court.

02:13:58
 But it didn't end up happening. It's an exceptional circumstance. Lawyers usually try to avoid putting themselves in situations where they could end up being a witness in the trial because, again, in order for that to happen, they have to withdraw and another lawyer has to come in and deal with the case. Which brings us to judicial notice.

02:14:23
 uh because it involves another way of getting a type of evidence or a type of thing in front of the trier of fact that can be considered as evidence without a witness so the general again rule is we need witnesses to come into court and give evidence for it to be considered by the trier of fact judicial notice is another exception to that general rule

02:14:47
 And what judicial notice says is that a judge, and by extension a jury, in particular if they're instructed to by a judge, can take judicial notice of what we call notorious facts. Notorious facts are things that are so widely known that they can't reasonably be questioned.

02:15:13
 We need to breathe oxygen to live as human beings. Rain falls from the sky. Buses are heavy. These are things that judges don't need to necessarily have evidence of to consider as proven in a trial.

02:15:36
 And what a judge can take judicial notice of is dependent on the time and place that the trial happens. So a judge can consider things without evidence of them if at the time and place of the trial it is so commonly known in that time and place that there would be no dispute over it.

02:16:09
 like if the trial was happening right now in vancouver a judge could take judicial notice of the fact that the sky train is a part of the transit system that people ride and get on and off in vancouver and it's part of the transit system no one would need to have evidence

02:16:28
 for a judge to say, oh, yes, well, the SkyTrain is part of the transit system in the Lower Mainland and it's a train that people get on and off. You don't need to have specific evidence of that for the judge to consider that to be proved in a trial in Vancouver right now, because it's so commonly known. Any person would know that judge or jury.

02:16:46
 so it says effectively a judge is entitled to take judicial notice to draw on their own experience of notorious facts or matters that are generally known as accepted and can't be questioned so like stanley park oh stanley park's in vancouver if there was a trial and they were all talking about what happened in stanley park and at the end of it the defense said oh there's no jurisdiction nobody said that this happened in british columbia

02:17:17
 The judge would be like, I can take judicial notice of the fact that Stanley Park is in British Columbia. Everybody in this courtroom knows that. Everybody that lives in Vancouver knows that. I don't need to have evidence of that. I can take judicial notice of the fact that Stanley Park is in British Columbia. It's in Vancouver. But that would be not necessarily the case if the trial happened in Ontario 50 years ago.

02:17:42
 what a judge or jury can take judicial notice of is dependent on the time and place of the trial. But again, it's this common sense rule that allows judges to find without evidence being introduced certain facts that are so widely known that there cannot be dispute over them. And interestingly, the case where we get this concept from

02:18:11
 was a traffic case out of Ontario. The most common description of it or common case that it's quoted for is a case called Regina versus Potts from the Ontario Court of Appeal.

02:18:29
 And in this case, Mr. Potts was charged with speeding contrary to the National Traffic Commission regulations. And he had a trial, disputed that he was speeding. And then in his argument at the end, he said, nobody called evidence in this that the street that I was driving on was part of the National Capital Commission traffic area.

02:18:55
 So he's like, I was charged with speeding in the National Traffic Commission area and under those rules, and nobody called evidence that the street, I think it's called Colonel By Drive, was part of this traffic area. And he said that was an essential element, that that was needed to be proved, and that the judge couldn't take judicial notice of that street being part of the National Capital Commission. And the Ontario Court of Appeal said no.

02:19:26
 And here's what they said about judicial notice.

02:19:31
 They said the justice of the peace in this case, because it was a traffic case, was entitled to take notice of the fact that the place where the offense occurred was a driveway of street under the control of the National Capital Commission without that fact having to be proved at trial. Because that fact that the street was in the National Capital Commission, so it's right around the capital area there in Ottawa, there's a special kind of traffic zone or special kind of area. They say in the city of Ottawa, where this happened at the time of this trial,

02:19:58
 It was sufficiently notorious well known by the constant presence of NCC vehicles

02:20:04
 employees and traffic signs. The status of the driveway was not disputed at trial because it was clear to all at trial what the status of the road was. The Ontario Court of Appeals says, look, there's signs everywhere. There's vehicles everywhere. Everybody knows that's the National Capital Commission. Everybody in trial knew that. The judge could take judicial notice of it. It is so commonly known they didn't need to call evidence of it. The judge could take judicial notice of the fact that this street was in the National Capital Commission without evidence of it.

02:20:31
 And they say, a court may take judicial notice of any fact or matter which is so generally known and accepted that it cannot reasonably be questioned, or of any fact or matter, and I'm just reading from here, which can readily be determined or verified by resort to sources where accuracy cannot reasonably be questioned. What constitutes common knowledge is to be judged by reference to that which is common knowledge in the community where and when the issue is being tried,

02:20:59
 it does not be a function of the appellate court to adjudicate on the correctness of the judge's decision to take judicial notice of some fact or matter known locally so the judge in that case at that time will know that community and know what's known in that community at that place and time so again what a judge takes judicial notice of in vancouver in 2025 doesn't mean that a judge in saskatchewan is going to have to take judicial notice

02:21:23
 because it's not going to be necessarily the same things that are known commonly in those two communities at those two different times. It's dependent on the community where the trial takes place and the knowledge of people in that community at that time. They describe what judicial notice is here.

02:21:52
 Again, is the acceptance by a court or judicial tribunal without the requirement of proof, without knowledge, of the truth of a particular fact or state of affairs that is such general or common knowledge in the community that proof of it can be dispensed with. This doctrine is thus said to be an exception to the general rule that a judge or jury may only consider evidence which has been tendered in court and may not act on personal knowledge. In this case, when it meets this standard and a judge decides it does, they can consider things for which there is not evidence in the trial.

02:22:26
 and quoting from here they go on to say judicial notice of matters of fact is founded upon that fund of knowledge and experience which is common to both judges and jurors and is not confined to the bench so it has to be such common knowledge that both a jury and the judge would know about it it can't just be like well every judge knows this because judges are smart and they get educated it's like no it needs to be common knowledge to everybody in that community at that time

02:22:54
 They go on to say, if the fact that it's relevant, everyone in court will assume that rain falls, for example. But when a fact is less obviously part of mankind's fund of common knowledge, it may be necessary for counsel to request that the judge take judicial notice and the judge will make a decision whether they can or not, or whether they would require evidence of it.

02:23:15
 common knowledge differs from time and place so a fact that was notorious a century ago may no longer be the appropriate subject of notice and may be common knowledge only a certain amongst only a certain class of the community so again if it was a trial in 1970

02:23:32
 What a SkyTrain was didn't exist. So to say that we can take judicial notice of the SkyTrain now and that we'll be able to in five years from now or that we could have 50 years ago, it doesn't work that way. It's a discretionary decision of the judge at that place and time.

02:24:02
 And just reading some highlights from this paragraph here. They say where judicial notice of some matter is taken by a trial court, the trier of the facts, whether judge alone or jury, may or may not share the common knowledge or the knowledge that is said to be common in the community. And if that happens, they can still take judicial notice of it if they're convinced, even if that particular judge is like the one person that doesn't know what the SkyTrain is, if they're convinced that everybody else does.

02:24:32
 they can look to sources and be convinced that they should take judicial notice of it, despite the fact they may be the one person who doesn't know that thing in the community.

02:24:42
 So if the judge is just like some person that's been hiding under a rock and the lawyer's convinced, like, hey, judge, everybody knows what the SkyTrain is. I know you make a ton of money and you would never lower yourself to take the SkyTrain. Everybody else in the community knows what SkyTrain is, even though the judge personally was like, oh, I guess everybody else knows that. If they're convinced that everybody else knows it, they can still take judicial notice of it.

02:25:07
 But the general idea is courts, judges, juries are not justified in acting on their own personal knowledge

02:25:18
 or familiarity with a particular matter without more. So if a judge knows about DNA evidence personally, they've heard a hundred cases with DNA evidence, they can't take judicial notice of DNA evidence because that's something they're personally familiar with. The whole community is not personally familiar with DNA evidence. So just because a judge has heard a hundred DNA cases, they can't take judicial notice of what DNA is about. There has to be evidence called it because that's not common knowledge within the community.

02:25:52
 And that actually happened with a case that I was dealing with some years back. It was a big, large commercial grow operation for cannabis before Cannabis Act came in. And the defense had to do with medicinal use of cannabis. And my client and other people had these licenses to grow medicinal cannabis. And the Crown called an expert witness relating to cannabis use and amounts

02:26:20
 for trafficking and got them qualified and all those sorts of things. And I cross-examined this person and I said, you would agree with me that you have no knowledge, training or expertise in medical use of cannabis. Nope. So you can't comment on any of the amounts that a medical cannabis user would use. Nope. Agreed they had no expertise and couldn't give an opinion on that.

02:26:39
 And the judge in that case was one of the top drug defense lawyers for about 25 years before he became a judge. And I could see him sitting there with steam coming out of his ears because he was like, I know all of this stuff about medical cannabis from years and years and years of practice doing this. And I can't use any of it because it is not something I can take judicial notice of because it's not something the community knows. So it can't be just that the judge knows it or that all judges know it. It has to be common to the community.

02:27:10
 And that is the idea of judicial notice and the case of R v. Potts, Regina v. Potts from the Ontario Court of Appeal. All right, so we'll look at some of the exceptions now. We know that the general idea is viva voce evidence. Witnesses come into court.

02:27:40
 And that's the most common way that we get evidence in at trials is from a witness live in the witness box giving evidence. And we have this idea of real evidence coming in in the form of exhibits, which usually come in through a witness who authenticates it, who tells the court and the judge what's going on with it and where it came from. Because they don't just fly into court. Someone has to attest to them and give evidence about what they're about.

02:28:09
 and often the evidence includes um that the police were searching what they were searching for and what they found and seized and how they gathered it but whatever they gather they need to be called in generally speaking to put that into evidence if it's admissible and relevant and material to that proceeding but there are um exceptions in the criminal code that allow witnesses to testify not live

02:28:39
 not viva voce living voice in the court there personally which we'll look at tonight and again general rule is we want the witness there in person live giving that evidence we'll look tonight at some of the exceptions in the criminal code uh that allow people to testify remotely and sometimes even have their evidence go in previously videotaped under certain exceptions

02:29:19
 which we'll look at first here, which is 714.1, which we may have looked at last term, I believe, but we'll look at it again because this is, now we know the rule of evidence is witnesses need to be there in person, live speaking, giving evidence, except if a witness is in Canada, a court may order that a witness can give evidence by audio conference or video conference. Excuse me, if the court is of the opinion

02:29:47
 that it would be appropriate having regard to all the circumstances, including all of these factors here. What the case law says relating to this section is if the credibility of this witness is at issue at all, it can't just be that it's inconvenient for them to come into court. That is not enough. They will need to come to court generally and be there present in court

02:30:14
 not to appear by video conference and i've never heard of a witness in a criminal trial appearing by audio conference has certainly never happened uh with me but i it is technically possible under 714.1 but generally that allows a witness who's present in canada a judge discretionarily to allow them to give evidence by video conference usually that's from another courthouse with a direct link video to the courtroom that the trial is being heard in

02:30:44
 Under 714.2, a witness who is not in Canada says the court shall receive evidence given by a witness outside of Canada by videoconference unless one of the parties satisfies the court that having testimony come in that way would be contrary to the principles of fundamental justice.

02:31:05
 Again, this isn't just somebody at home in another country speaking by Zoom into court. The one time that I've seen this in one of my trials, it was a witness coming from London, and they were in a court in London.

02:31:18
 connected by closed circuit video connection to the court in Vancouver. And they had staff there to make sure that this person wasn't being coached by another witness and so on. But it does have the ability for the witness to appear by video conference outside of Canada with the discretion of the judge.

02:31:42
 But when that happens and a witness appears from outside of Canada, 714.6 applies and 714.5, and they're given an oath or affirmation in accordance with Canadian law, generally speaking, under subsection A. But when a person's outside of Canada giving evidence by video in a trial in Canada, the evidence is deemed to be given in Canada. They are legally deemed, they are legally...

02:32:12
 considered to be present in Canada when they give that evidence for the purposes of the laws relating to procedure, evidence, perjury, and contempt of court. So they're subject to all the same rules and regulations and consequences as they would be if they were physically present there in person in Canada. Now we'll move to...

02:32:41
 715 sub 1. this is evidence previously taken and raj you asked a question about this earlier in the term about what happens when a witness dies and then they want to get their evidence in a trial this is an exception where potentially they can do that under a narrow exception that this allows for under 715 sub 1.

02:33:04
 which is evidence previously taken. It says where at the trial of an accused, a person whose evidence was given at a previous trial on the same charge. So if there's been an appeal and now there's a retrial. And it says evidence taken in an investigation of the charge against the accused. I've never seen that happen. I'm not sure that that ever gets used. Usually it's at a previous trial against the accused or on the preliminary trial

02:33:34
 inquiry into the charge, if they refuse to be sworn or to give evidence, or if facts are proved on oath from which it can be reasonably inferred that the person is dead, has since become and is insane, and that's not a word that we use in common anymore, if a person has a mental health capacity issue and they're not competent to give evidence any longer, or they're so ill that they're unable to travel or testify, or they're absent from Canada,

02:34:01
 and it's proved that the evidence was taken in the presence of the accused it may be admitted as evidence in the proceedings without further proof unless the accused proves that the accused did not have full opportunity to cross-examine the witness so generally what happens is if there's a preliminary inquiry a witness gives evidence at the preliminary inquiry they go through direct they're cross-examined the accused would be there because the accused must be present for all parts of their trial when the witness is getting evidence section 650

02:34:29
 and then that person dies or becomes otherwise completely unavailable for trial, as contemplated in the subsections there, they can apply under this section to have the recording and or transcript of that person's evidence from the preliminary inquiry or from the previous trial, if there's retrial, given as evidence at the subsequent trial. Now,

02:34:57
 It is discretionarily. It may be admitted as evidence in the proceedings without further proof. But it doesn't happen very often. And when it does, the trier of fact is going to be very cautious about how much weight gets attached to that. I had this happen once. It was way back at the beginning of my career when I was working for Crown Counsel in a big gang prosecution.

02:35:23
 There was one of the main witnesses in an extortion and kidnapping case, gave evidence at the preliminary inquiry and died before the trial happened because it was a long proceeding. It took a long time to come to court and it was a very long trial. And we as the Crown applied under this section to have the evidence of that witness from the preliminary inquiry form evidence at the trial because he was cross-examined.

02:35:45
 And the judge did allow it to form evidence at the trial, but very specifically in his reasons at the end of the trial said, I attach almost no weight to this evidence because the issues that were dealt with at the preliminary inquiry were nowhere near as fulsome as what was at issue in the trial and the cross-examination would have been much different if this person had been called at trial. So they allowed it, admissible, but still examined the weight, didn't attach much weight to it.

02:36:14
 but it can happen under section 715 sub 1 and then we look at sections 715.1 sub 1 which has to do with video recorded evidence this is a common section that's used for child victim complainants

02:36:43
 For child victim complainants, when the police meet with them and take their witness statement, they will often and almost always now audio and video record it, and they will take it in line with certain recognized protocols to do with child witnesses so that it will conform to this section. Because a lot of times what happens is a child is victimized when they're young,

02:37:09
 They tell this story to the police and it might be a year, two years, two and a half years, three years plus. By the time the investigation is done and the person is charged and it finally comes to trial, maybe the person, the child was, you know,

02:37:24
 seven at the time of the events, and they're 10 or almost 11 by the time of the trial, and they don't necessarily remember everything as well as they would have at that time. This provides an exception to the rule that generally your prior statements don't form your evidence. You have to come into court and speak about what happened. That allows for children's prior videotaped statements to form the direct evidence or a part of the direct evidence at the trial.

02:37:54
 when it meets these criteria. 715.1 child witnesses. So in any proceeding against an accused in which a victim or other witness under the age of 18, so a minor witness, at the time of the alleged offense having been committed. So the time of the allegation has to be under 18. A video recording made within a reasonable time after the alleged offense. So that's the first hurdle, has to be made within a reasonable time after the alleged offense.

02:38:23
 in which they describe the acts complained of, so they describe the offense, that's the second thing, is admissible in evidence if the victim or witness, while testifying, adopts the contents of the recording, that's the last thing, unless the judge or justice is of the opinion that the admission of the video recording and evidence would interfere with the proper administration of justice. There is

02:38:47
 uh this caveat at the end that could keep it out but generally speaking if the other conditions are met if the video recording is made within a reasonable time after the alleged defense which there's a bunch of case law about what that means and they complain they describe the offense the allegations um and they adopt it in their evidence so they come into court and what happens is

02:39:10
 the witness would come into court in a voir dire. They would play the statement, the video statement. They would be asked, is that you? Do you recall that? And do you adopt that as true? Is that what happened? If they say yes, then generally speaking, unless defense counsel can convince them there's some major issue,

02:39:28
 That will become admissible in the trial proper. They'll come out of the voir dire and that will form the direct evidence of that person at trial. They may ask some more questions in direct, but then they will be subjected to cross-examination.

02:39:41
 which is still where we're going to test that evidence to see the weight and if it stands up. But the direct evidence can be formed by this video or part of it can be formed by this video if it meets the criteria in this. And this is very common for child witnesses in child offenses involving children. A lot of times you will see the evidence, the direct evidence being formed by a video, a prior video statement when it meets these requirements.

02:40:07
 exception to the general rule, again, that witnesses come into court and their prior statements do not form their evidence. Similarly, 715.2, it's the same thing for a witness who has a disability. Victim or witness is able to communicate evidence, competent,

02:40:34
 but may have difficulty doing so by reason of mental or physical disability. We looked at that last week. They've met the hurdle for competence, but they're still, they're having some difficulties because of disability. This same thing, same requirements. A video recording made within a reasonable time. They describe the acts complained of. If they testify and adopt the contents of the video recording as what was true and what happened, unless...

02:40:59
 the judge is satisfied that it would interfere with the proper administration of justice. So children or witnesses under 18 and witnesses with a disability who are otherwise competent can have a prior video statement form the direct of their evidence and still be cross-examined on it discretionarily under those two sections.

02:41:26
 and we will take a look at 486.2 as well which we looked at in 7001 but we look at in the context now of the rules of evidence which is testimony outside the courtroom so again rule is witnesses come into court give viva voce evidence live in court

02:41:51
 but 486.2 sub 1 says that despite section 650 and if we remember we looked at this early earlier in the term section 650 says that the uh accused is able to make full answer in defense and that generally involves being able to face the person who's accused you in any proceedings

02:42:15
 against an accused, the judge or justice shall in application of the prosecutor in respect of a witness who's under the age of 18 or who is able to communicate evidence but has a physical or mental disability. So again, a child witness, a young witness or a competent witness with a disability

02:42:31
 On the application of that witness can order or shall order that the witness testify outside the courtroom or behind a screen or other device that would allow the witness not to see the accused unless the judge or justice is of the opinion that the order would interfere with the proper administration of justice. So again, we looked at the rule from like a witness accommodation

02:42:52
 Standpoint last term, 7001, now we're looking at it as an exception to an evidence rule, which is that you need to be present in court live speaking to the judge or jury there. This allows certain vulnerable types of witnesses to be outside of the courtroom to give evidence, again, usually just in a different courtroom by direct video link, but not being personally present in court.

02:43:15
 and that's 46.2 sub 1 that is generally mandatory and then there's a discretionary one in subsection 2 which says that they may for other witnesses allow the same type of accommodation to either be behind that one-way screen where the jury and the accused can see the witness or to be outside of the courtroom by closed circuit tv video link giving evidence in the courtroom or

02:43:43
 non-young and not disabled witnesses discretionarily under their again in exception to the general rule that witnesses must come into court and give evidence live viva voce living voice

02:44:14
 Okay, so we will end now on the last topic for tonight. And the last topic for you're studying for your...

02:44:25
 midterm, which is next week, we'll get into some specific evidence categories. And the first one we're going to look at is, I'd say, the most common and broad rule of evidence that we've talked about several times. You've heard me mention several times this term and last term, and we're going to get into what it means tonight specifically. And it is the rule of hearsay.

02:44:53
 It's a tough one to wrap your mind around at first. But once you get it, I remember hearing it the first time and I was like, what is that person talking about? Just let it sink in for a minute. The first time you hear it, when I say it, I'm like, it's this. You're going to be like, what? And I give a couple examples and we talk about a few things. It'll start to make sense and you'll start to be able to piece it together.

02:45:16
 But the general rule is hearsay is inadmissible. Guess what? Whole ton of exceptions. We're going to look at the general rule tonight. We're going to look at the major exception, a couple of the major exceptions, and then we'll come back after the midterm and we'll look at some of the more nuanced exceptions. But generally hearsay is this. It's an out of court statement made by a person who's not under oath.

02:45:46
 tendered in court for the truth of its contents. So an out-of-court statement made by a person who's not in court, who's not under oath, and it's put in in court by someone else, or through another method like a report,

02:46:03
 that is tendered for the truth of its contents, which means we're trying to, the party that's calling the evidence is saying, this is true. You should consider that this is true evidence, that this truly happened. You can rely on what this person said. The rule is any out of court statement. So a person who's not in court, not under oath, any statement that they've made is inadmissible evidence at the proceeding. If it's being put into court as true.

02:46:31
 That's the general rule. If you're not in court and you're not under oath and you've said something, generally speaking, that's not admissible in court. I can't come into court and say, Raj told me all about this stuff and you should believe it is true. If I'm coming into court and I'm saying, Raj told me something and you can accept it as true, that is hearsay and inadmissible.

02:46:54
 If you're going to come to court, that's how we get your evidence in, right? We get you into evidence. We get you to come to court and take an oath and be cross-examined on what you say. And generally, then I don't need to say what you told me. But of course, there's an exception where what I'm saying is not actually being tendered to be true. And then it's not actually hearsay. If I'm just saying it because I want to explain what I was thinking and what Raj told me, then what I'm saying, it doesn't matter if it's true.

02:47:23
 it's actually not hearsay so it matters the purpose for what the statement is being put in for whether we see it as hearsay or not whether it is defined as hearsay or not because that is the key is the statement of the person who's not in court the witness who's saying it in court are they saying it for a purpose that it should be accepted as true and when we look at the examples it'll make more sense

02:48:01
 So let's say this. We're in court here. This is the witness box. I am not an art major by any way, shape, or form. Here's the witness box. We're in court. I don't know. Judge is up here somewhere. And we've got a witness here. We'll call them witness W. And they're in court. And they get up on the stand. And they take an oath to tell the truth. And they say...

02:48:36
 Bob told me. Bob told me that he saw the accused at the victim's house on the day that the victim was killed. Bob's not in court. Bob's not coming to court. But witness W is like, I talked to Bob and Bob told me that he saw the accused at the victim's house on the day that the victim was killed.

02:49:06
 If the party who's calling Witness W is trying to put that statement in to prove that the accused was at the victim's house on that date, they're tendering for the truth of its contents. They're asking the trier of fact, the judge or the jury, to believe what Bob said. If they're putting it in for that purpose, you can trust what Bob said, you can believe what Bob said,

02:49:35
 Bob told me that the accused was at the victim's house the day the victim died. And I'm Crown Counsel and I'm calling W and I'm saying, yeah, that's evidence that the accused was at the victim's house the day they died. That means we're putting it forward so you would believe what Bob said is true. That is hearsay. That is on its face and admissible.

02:50:04
 And we'll look at what the difference is when it's not for the truth of its contents in a few moments. I talk a bit more about why we have this rule. And because the issue is here is if Bob doesn't testify, how do we really know what Bob saw that day? How do we even really know if Witness W heard Bob properly?

02:50:36
 or remembers it properly. If the Crown or a party wants to lead this evidence, they need to call Bob to testify if they want it to be considered as true. Because we want Bob to be cross-examined, right? We want to test that evidence and see what Bob remembers or thought or saw or heard, because all Witness W can say is what Bob told them. They can't be cross-examined on Bob's experience of it.

02:51:06
 And if we're putting this in to be true, we want to make sure that we can put weight on it and rely on it. But of course, there's going to be an exception that we'll see later on. Don't worry about it right now, where we can potentially get that evidence of Bob in for the truth of its contents anyways. But that's just a bit of foreshadowing. We'll come to that after the midterm. But again,

02:51:34
 Bob's not coming to court. Bob can't be cross-examined. We don't know the value of what Bob is saying. We don't know if Bob's full of crap. We don't know if Bob's a liar. We don't know anything about Bob other than what witness W's told us that they said. So policy issues for the rule. W has no experience personally at this event. Only what they were told. And they're the person that's being cross-examined. And they can't be cross-examined on the truth of this experience because they weren't there.

02:52:07
 We can't know if Bob is telling the truth. There's no cross-examination to explore that. We don't even know if Witness W heard Bob properly. Maybe he didn't even actually hear what Bob told him properly, or he remembers it incorrectly. We don't know if there's other things that were said by Bob that brought into question how sure of what they were of what they saw or what they heard. We don't know if Bob's telling this Witness W the truth.

02:52:34
 Those are all things that we have to explore in cross-examination before we put weight on it. And if we're going to say that it's true, we need to understand if we can believe it and what we can rely on it and how much weight to place on it. That happens through cross-examination. And if we can't cross-examine Bob, we can't be relying on that for the truth of its contents, generally speaking.

02:52:58
 But that's what hearsay is. When a person who's not in court, someone else is trying to put in a statement that they've made to be considered as true. Again, this idea of contemporaneous or at the same time cross-examination and lie-viva-voce evidence of Bob is how we know what to trust.

02:53:28
 So an exception is known as the party's exception. So the first exception that we'll look at is called the party's exception. This rule doesn't generally apply to parties. So in a civil matter, if it's like me versus moron neighbor, I could put in as hearsay anything that moron neighbor has told me against moron neighbor. And moron neighbor can put in anything as hearsay that I've said.

02:53:58
 So the parties in a civil proceeding, this rule, you can put in what each other have said because you're both in court. You're both there listening and you both have the opportunity to dispute what the other person has said and give evidence and be cross-examined on it. You're actually both in court. In a criminal trial, this operates to, and there's an exception for the crown, but I'm not going to get into it. Generally, the party's exception in the criminal sphere is this.

02:54:28
 Anything that the accused has said to people can be used against them as an exception under the party's exception of the hearsay rule. Because the accused is in court. They are there. They can give evidence. They can push back on. They can be cross-examined. So generally speaking, what the accused has said to people is admissible against them as an exception of the hearsay rule. It's called the party's exception.

02:54:57
 And that's how we get, when an accused gives a confession or a statement to the police, that's hearsay. It's coming in in the form of a video, but it is a hearsay statement.

02:55:12
 It's evidence coming in by a person who's not on the stand, not giving evidence and isn't being cross-examined, but it is an exception to the hearsay rule because it's the accused. Party's exception to the hearsay rule. So if you're under investigation for murder and you tell your best friend, I committed the murder, I committed the offense, that is admissible for the truth of its contents against you at your trial if your neighbor, whoever you told that to, comes in and gives evidence for the Crown.

02:55:42
 because of the party's exception in the hearsay room. It can be considered for the truth of its contents. Of course, weight has to be assigned to it, but it can be considered for its truth because of the party's exception. And from a policy reason, again, the accused is there in court. So it's a bit of a different situation. The accused is there.

02:56:03
 They can give evidence. They can push back on it. They can counter that. They have to give up their right to remain silent and subject themselves to cross-examination and all sorts of other things that they do. But they are present in court and can give evidence. So there is this exception. And we'll look at a case after the midterm that relates to another way they can kind of push back on that.

02:56:35
 So again, we can't challenge this evidence of the person who's not there without cross-examination, and we see that cross-examination is fundamental for the search for the truth. And without that tool of cross-examination, the evidence of the witness cannot be tested, and we're left with just the bare assertion of what was told to the witness who's in court. And if a person's only repeating what they're told, they can't be cross-examined as to the

02:57:07
 truth of this statement only the accuracy of their memory of hearing and hearsay isn't just verbal statements hearsay statements can be written it can be a report so for your your group projects

02:57:31
 When you have a report or something that's written by another person, that's hearsay. And if you want to put something that's written by a person who's not coming into court into trial as evidence, you've got to find an exception to the rule. It's generally speaking verbal statements, but it can also be if writing's in my diary or a report that I've created. Let's say I create a report and I give it to the police and then I die.

02:58:01
 Trying to get my report in at a trial would be hearsay because I'm not coming in to tell about what happened. And I'm not subjected to cross-examination. So reports or writings of a person who's not coming into court, if you try and get those in, say in your group project, you better be looking at exceptions to the hearsay rule or it's not going to be admissible. Unless you can get that person into court.

02:58:32
 All right, so now we'll look at a different example that will show you the difference between when a statement is being tendered for or put forward for the truth of its contents, or if it's just being put forward for the fact that it was said. When a statement's just being put forward for evidence of the fact that the statement was said,

02:58:58
 it's not being put forward for the truth of its contents. And technically it's not hearsay and it can be admissible, but not for the purpose of proving that the statement is true, just to prove that it was said. And a lot of times that looks like this. So witness W is on the stand and they're like, Bob told me that this thing and that thing happened. So I didn't go in the house to check to see if anybody was there.

02:59:25
 Now, if witness W is saying that just to explain why they didn't go and check in a house, it's not being put forward for the truth of what Bob said. It's just for the fact that it was said and that it made W perceive things a certain way and explain why W didn't do something. It affected the way that W thought when they heard the statement, and it affected the way they acted.

02:59:50
 We're not putting it in there to say that the statement is true just for the fact that it was said and maybe it had an effect on what W did or thought. Sometimes it's called state of mind of the hearer. Sometimes it's called being put forward just that the statement was said. But when it's not being put forward to be true, it's not really hearsay.

03:00:17
 only hearsay and we only run into this problem when the party is putting the evidence in to be considered as true. And you're going to get an objection anytime there's a witness on the stand that's like, hey, somebody who's not here told me this thing. Objection, hearsay.

03:00:33
 And then the argument or the discussion is going to be, well, what purpose is the party that's calling this witness putting it in for? Are we going to say what Bob said is true? Oh, no, no. We're not putting it in to say that what Bob said is true. We're just putting it forward so that Witness W can explain why they didn't go in the house or why they didn't call their friend or why they decided to drive home that time. It affected the way that they thought and what they did.

03:00:57
 But we're not saying that you can rely on what Bob said, because Bob's not here. Well, then it doesn't matter if what Bob said is true, and it doesn't technically create a hearsay issue. So I know we're at 940, but I'm just going to give this one quick example before we end that illustrates this a bit, which is kind of already what I was talking about, which is this. So now, if witness W is in court, and he says,

03:01:37
 bob told me witness w's in court giving evidence under oath and he says i talked to bob and on the night of the murder i talked to bob and bob said that he went in the victim's house and he went upstairs and there was no one there oh objection hearsay you're like well you're trying to prove that there was nobody in the house and the party that's calling witness w might say no no no no

03:02:08
 We're not calling this witness to try and prove that there was no one in that house. The witness is telling a trier of fact what Bob told them because witness W didn't go in the house, didn't check to see if anyone was in there because Bob told him that. And normally you would have expected if they'd heard a gunshot or whatever it was, they would go in the house and try and explore and find out what was there. But they didn't go in because Bob said they'd been inside and there was no one in there.

03:02:37
 Now, it's not to prove what Bob said is true. It doesn't matter if what Bob said is true. It's only being put forward to show what W understood about the situation and to explain why they may have acted a certain way.

03:02:52
 It depends on what the party that's calling this witness wants the trier of fact to do with it. And if that's the case, there'll be an argument over it, a decision made by the judge. The judge might be like, OK, that's not hearsay. Now we'll call the jury back in. They'll hear this. And at the end of the trial, or maybe even on a break before they go into the end of the court or that day on lunch or whatever, the judge will say, hey, look, you've heard witness W talk about what Bob told them. You may not under any circumstances

03:03:21
 Consider what Bob said as being true. It is no proof of the fact of what Bob said about what happened in that house or who was in that house. That is only evidence to help you understand why W did what they did by not going in the house. No proof whatsoever of the fact that there was no one in that house. Bob wasn't here. If you want evidence from Bob about who was in that house, we would need Bob here.

03:03:42
 not really hearsay. So that's the difference. If it's being put forward to be true, to be considered as true by the party calling the witness, hearsay. And you have to find an exception if you want to come in. If it's not being put forward to be considered as true, it's not really hearsay. It's just being put forward that it was said or to see the state of mind of the person who heard the statement.

03:04:04
 Okay, we'll cut it there for tonight. Sorry for keeping you a couple of minutes extra. We'll see you next week for the exam. Online people, for the exam, you need to be in the meeting with your camera on. You cannot do the exam unless you're in the meeting with your camera on, as we've been through many times. Good luck with your studying. I will post the midterm study guide tomorrow.

03:04:32
 question on the midterm? 18. And it is worth 30, is it 30? 30 and then the final is worth 35. There is one bonus mark, potential for 31 out of 30, which you're all going to get if you use the study guide.

